The Water of Life

Cuentos Populars Catalans, per lo Dr. D. Francisco de S. Maspous y
Labros. Barcelona, 1885.


Three brothers and one sister lived together in a small cottage, and
they loved one another dearly. One day the eldest brother, who had never
done anything but amuse himself from sunrise to sunset, said to the
rest, 'Let us all work hard, and perhaps we shall grow rich, and be able
to build ourselves a palace.'

And his brothers and sister answered joyfully, 'Yes, we will all work!'

So they fell to working with all their might, till at last they became
rich, and were able to build themselves a beautiful palace; and everyone
came from miles round to see its wonders, and to say how splendid it
was. No one thought of finding any faults, till at length an old woman,
who had been walking through the rooms with a crowd of people, suddenly
exclaimed, 'Yes, it is a splendid palace, but there is still something
it needs!'

'And what may that be?'

'A church.'

When they heard this the brothers set to work again to earn some more
money, and when they had got enough they set about building a church,
which should be as large and beautiful as the palace itself.

And after the church was finished greater numbers of people than
ever flocked to see the palace and the church and vast gardens and
magnificent halls.

But one day, as the brothers were as usual doing the honours to their
guests, an old man turned to them and said, 'Yes, it is all most
beautiful, but there is still something it needs!'

'And what may that be?'

'A pitcher of the water of life, a branch of the tree the smell of whose
flowers gives eternal beauty, and the talking bird.'

'And where am I to find all those?'

'Go to the mountain that is far off yonder, and you will find what you
seek.'

After the old man had bowed politely and taken farewell of them the
eldest brother said to the rest, 'I will go in search of the water of
life, and the talking bird, and the tree of beauty.'

'But suppose some evil thing befalls you?' asked his sister. 'How shall
we know?'


'You are right,' he replied; ' I had not thought of that!'

Then they followed the old man, and said to him, 'My eldest brother
wishes to seek for the water of life, and the tree of beauty, and the
talking bird, that you tell him are needful to make our palace perfect.
But how shall we know if any evil thing befall him?'

So the old man took them a knife, and gave it to them, saying, 'Keep
this carefully, and as long as the blade is bright all is well; but if
the blade is bloody, then know that evil has befallen him.'

The brothers thanked him, and departed, and went straight to the palace,
where they found the young man making ready to set out for the mountain
where the treasures he longed for lay hid.

And he walked, and he walked, and he walked, till he had gone a great
way, and there he met a giant.

'Can you tell me how much further I have still to go before I reach that
mountain yonder?'

'And why do you wish to go there?'

'I am seeking the water of life, the talking bird, and a branch of the
tree of beauty.'

'Many have passed by seeking those treasures, but none have ever come
back; and you will never come back either, unless you mark my words.
Follow this path, and when you reach the mountain you will find it
covered with stones. Do not stop to look at them, but keep on your way.
As you go you will hear scoffs and laughs behind you; it will be the
stones that mock. Do not heed them; above all, do not turn round. If you
do you will become as one of them. Walk straight on till you get to the
top, and then take all you wish for.'

The young man thanked him for his counsel, and walked, and walked, and
walked, till he reached the mountain. And as he climbed he heard behind
him scoffs and jeers, but he kept his ears steadily closed to them. At
last the noise grew so loud that he lost patience, and he stooped to
pick up a stone to hurl into the midst of the clamour, when suddenly his
arm seemed to stiffen, and the next moment he was a stone himself!

That day his sister, who thought her brother's steps were long in
returning, took out the knife and found the blade was red as blood. Then
she cried out to her brothers that something terrible had come to pass.

'I will go and find him,' said the second. And he went.

And he walked, and he walked, and he walked, till he met the giant, and
asked him if he had seen a young man travelling towards the mountain.

And the giant answered, 'Yes, I have seen him pass, but I have not seen
him come back. The spell must have worked upon him.'

'Then what can I do to disenchant him, and find the water of life, the
talking bird, and a branch of the tree of beauty?'

'Follow this path, and when you reach the mountain you will find it
covered with stones. Do not stop to look at them, but climb steadily on.
Above all, heed not the laughs and scoffs that will arise on all sides,
and never turn round. And when you reach the top you can then take all
you desire.'

The young man thanked him for his counsel, and set out for the mountain.
But no sooner did he reach it than loud jests and gibes broke out on
every side, and almost deafened him. For some time he let them rail,
and pushed boldly on, till he had passed the place which his brother had
gained; then suddenly he thought that among the scoffing sounds he heard
his brother's voice. He stopped and looked back; and another stone was
added to the number.

Meanwhile the sister left at home was counting the days when her two
brothers should return to her. The time seemed long, and it would be
hard to say how often she took out the knife and looked at its polished
blade to make sure that this one at least was still safe. The blade was
always bright and clear; each time she looked she had the happiness of
knowing that all was well, till one evening, tired and anxious, as she
frequently was at the end of the day, she took it from its drawer, and
behold! the blade was red with blood. Her cry of horror brought her
youngest brother to her, and, unable to speak, she held out the knife!

'I will go,' he said.

So he walked, and he walked, and he walked, until he met the giant, and
he asked, 'Have two young men, making for yonder mountain, passed this
way?'

And the giant answered, 'Yes, they have passed by, but they never came
back, and by this I know that the spell has fallen upon them.'

'Then what must I do to free them, and to get the water of life, and the
talking bird, and the branch of the tree of beauty?'

'Go to the mountain, which you will find so thickly covered with stones
that you will hardly be able to place your feet, and walk straight
forward, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left, and paying
no heed to the laughs and scoffs which will follow you, till you reach
the top, and then you may take all that you desire.'

The young man thanked the giant for his counsel, and set forth to the
mountain. And when he began to climb there burst forth all around him
a storm of scoffs and jeers; but he thought of the giant's words, and
looked neither to the right hand nor to the left, till the mountain top
lay straight before him. A moment now and he would have gained it, when,
through the groans and yells, he heard his brothers' voices. He turned,
and there was one stone the more.


And all this while his sister was pacing up and down the palace, hardly
letting the knife out of her hand, and dreading what she knew she would
see, and what she did see. The blade grew red before her eyes, and she
said, 'Now it is my turn.'

So she walked, and she walked, and she walked till she came to the
giant, and prayed him to tell her if he had seen three young men pass
that way seeking the distant mountain.

'I have seen them pass, but they have never returned, and by this I know
that the spell has fallen upon them.'

'And what must I do to set them free, and to find the water of life, and
the talking bird, and a branch of the tree of beauty?'

'You must go to that mountain, which is so full of stones that your
feet will hardly find a place to tread, and as you climb you will hear
a noise as if all the stones in the world were mocking you; but pay
no heed to anything you may hear, and, once you gain the top, you have
gained everything.'

The girl thanked him for his counsel, and set out for the mountain; and
scarcely had she gone a few steps upwards when cries and screams broke
forth around her, and she felt as if each stone she trod on was a living
thing. But she remembered the words of the giant, and knew not what had
befallen her brothers, and kept her face steadily towards the mountain
top, which grew nearer and nearer every moment. But as she mounted the
clamour increased sevenfold: high above them all rang the voices of her
three brothers. But the girl took no heed, and at last her feet stood
upon the top.

Then she looked round, and saw, lying in a hollow, the pool of the water
of life. And she took the brazen pitcher that she had brought with her,
and filled it to the brim. By the side of the pool stood the tree of
beauty, with the talking bird on one of its boughs; and she caught the
bird, and placed it in a cage, and broke off one of the branches.

After that she turned, and went joyfully down the hill again, carrying
her treasures, but her long climb had tired her out, and the brazen
pitcher was very heavy, and as she walked a few drops of the water spilt
on the stones, and as it touched them they changed into young men and
maidens, crowding about her to give thanks for their deliverance.

So she learnt by this how the evil spell might be broken, and she
carefully sprinkled every stone till there was not one left--only a
great company of youths and girls who followed her down the mountain.

When they arrived at the palace she did not lose a moment in planting
the branch of the tree of beauty and watering it with the water of life.
And the branch shot up into a tree, and was heavy with flowers, and the
talking bird nestled in its branches.

Now the fame of these wonders was noised abroad, and the people flocked
in great numbers to see the three marvels, and the maiden who had won
them; and among the sightseers came the king's son, who would not go
till everything was shown him, and till he had heard how it had all
happened. And the prince admired the strangeness and beauty of the
treasures in the palace, but more than all he admired the beauty and
courage of the maiden who had brought them there. So he went home and
told his parents, and gained their consent to wed her for his wife.

Then the marriage was celebrated in the church adjoining the palace.
Then the bridegroom took her to his own home, where they lived happy for
ever after.