The Cunning Hare



In a very cold country, far across the seas, where ice and snow cover
the ground for many months in the year, there lived a little hare,
who, as his father and mother were both dead, was brought up by his
grandmother. As he was too young, and she was too old, to work, they
were very poor, and often did not have enough to eat.

One day, when the little fellow was hungrier than usual, he asked his
grandmother if he might go down to the river and catch a fish for their
breakfast, as the thaw had come and the water was flowing freely again.
She laughed at him for thinking that any fish would let itself be caught
by a hare, especially such a young one; but as she had the rheumatism
very badly, and could get no food herself, she let him go. 'If he does
not catch a fish he may find something else,' she said to herself. So
she told her grandson where to look for the net, and how he was to set
it across the river; but just as he was starting, feeling himself quite
a man, she called him back.

'After all, I don't know what is the use of your going, my boy! For even
if you should catch a fish, I have no fire to cook it with.'

'Let me catch my fish, and I will soon make you a fire,' he answered
gaily, for he was young, and knew nothing about the difficulties of
fire-making.

It took him some time to haul the net through bushes and over fields,
but at length he reached a pool in the river which he had often heard
was swarming with fish, and here he set the net, as his grandmother had
directed him.

He was so excited that he hardly slept all night, and at the very first
streak of dawn he ran as fast as ever he could down to the river. His
heart beat as quickly as if he had had dogs behind him, and he hardly
dared to look, lest he should be disappointed. Would there be even one
fish? And at this thought the pangs of hunger made him feel quite sick
with fear. But he need not have been afraid; in every mesh of the net
was a fine fat fish, and of course the net itself was so heavy that
he could only lift one corner. He threw some of the fish back into the
water, and buried some more in a hole under a stone, where he would be
sure to find them. Then he rolled up the net with the rest, put it on
his back and carried it home. The weight of the load caused his back to
ache, and he was thankful to drop it outside their hut, while he rushed
in, full of joy, to tell his grandmother. 'Be quick and clean them!' he
said, 'and I will go to those people's tents on the other side of the
water.'

The old woman stared at him in horror as she listened to his proposal.
Other people had tried to steal fire before, and few indeed had come
back with their lives; but as, contrary to all her expectations, he had
managed to catch such a number of fish, she thought that perhaps there
was some magic about him which she did not know of, and did not try to
hinder him.

When the fish were all taken out, he fetched the net which he had laid
out to dry, folded it up very small, and ran down to the river, hoping
that he might find a place narrow enough for him to jump over; but he
soon saw that it was too wide for even the best jumper in the world. For
a few moments he stood there, wondering what was to be done, then there
darted into his head some words of a spell which he had once heard a
wizard use, while drinking from the river. He repeated them, as well as
he could remember, and waited to see what would happen. In five minutes
such a grunting and a puffing was heard, and columns of water rose into
the air, though he could not tell what had made them. Then round the
bend of the stream came fifteen huge whales, which he ordered to place
themselves heads to tails, like stepping stones, so that he could jump
from one to the other till he landed on the opposite shore. Directly he
got there he told the whales that he did not need them any more, and sat
down in the sand to rest.

Unluckily some children who were playing about caught sight of him, and
one of them, stealing softly up behind him, laid tight hold of his
ears. The hare, who had been watching the whales as they sailed down the
river, gave a violent start, and struggled to get away; but the boy held
on tight, and ran back home, as fast as he could go.

'Throw it in the pot,' said the old woman, as soon as he had told his
story; 'put it in that basket, and as soon as the water boils in the pot
we will hang it over the fire!'

'Better kill it first,' said the old man; and the hare listened,
horribly frightened, but still looking secretly to see if there was no
hole through which he could escape, if he had a chance of doing so. Yes,
there was one, right in the top of the tent, so, shaking himself, as if
with fright, he let the end of his net unroll itself a little.

'I wish that a spark of fire would fall on my net,' whispered he; and
the next minute a great log fell forward into the midst of the tent,
causing every one to spring backwards. The sparks were scattered in
every direction, and one fell on the net, making a little blaze. In an
instant the hare had leaped through the hole, and was racing towards
the river, with men, women, and children after him. There was no time to
call back the whales, so, holding the net tight in his mouth, he wished
himself across the river. Then he jumped high into the air, and landed
safe on the other side, and after turning round to be sure that there
was no chance of anyone pursuing him, trotted happily home to his
grandmother.

'Didn't I tell you I would bring you fire?' said he, holding up his net,
which was now burning briskly.

'But how did you cross the water?' inquired the old woman.

'Oh, I just jumped!' said he. And his grandmother asked him no more
questions, for she saw that he was wiser than she.

['Indian Folk Tales.' Bureau of Ethnology.]



The Turtle and His Bride



There was once a turtle who lived among a great many people of different
kinds, in a large camp near a big river which was born right up amongst
the snows, and flowed straight away south till it reached a sea where
the water was always hot.

There were many other turtles in the camp, and this turtle was kind and
pleasant to them all, but he did not care for any of them very much, and
felt rather lonely.

At last he built himself a hut, and filled it with skins for seats, and
made it as comfortable as any hut for miles round; and when it was quite
finished he looked about among the young women to see which of them he
should ask to be his wife.

It took him some time to make up his mind, for no turtle likes being
hurried, but at length he found one girl who seemed prettier and more
industrious than the rest, and one day he entered her home, and said:
'Will you marry me?'

The young woman was so surprised at this question that she dropped
the beaded slipper she was making, and stared at the turtle. She felt
inclined to laugh--the idea was so absurd; but she was kind-hearted and
polite, so she looked as grave as she could, and answered:

'But how are you going to provide for a family? Why, when the camp
moves, you will not even be able to keep up with the rest!'

'I can keep up with the best of them,' replied the turtle, tossing his
head. But though he was very much offended he did not let the girl see
it, and begged and, prayed her so hard to marry him that, at last, she
consented, very unwillingly.

'You will have to wait till the spring, though,' she said; 'I must make
a great many slippers and dresses for myself, as I shall not have much
time afterwards.'

This did not please the turtle; but he knew it was no use talking, so
all he answered was:

'I shall go to war and take some captives, and I shall be away several
months. And when I return I shall expect you to be ready to marry me.'

So he went back to his hut, and at once set about his preparations. The
first thing he did was to call all his relations together, and ask them
if they would come with him and make war on the people of a neighbouring
village. The turtles, who were tired of doing nothing, agreed at once,
and next day the whole tribe left the camp. The girl was standing at
the door of her hut as they passed, and laughed out loud--they moved
so slowly. Her lover, who was marching at the head, grew very angry at
this, and cried out:

'In four days from now you will be weeping instead of laughing, because
there will be hundreds of miles between you and me.'

'In four days,' replied the girl--who only promised to marry him in
order to get rid of him--'in four days you will hardly be out of sight.'

'Oh, I did not mean four days, but four YEARS,' answered the turtle,
hastily; 'whatever happens I shall be back by then.'

The army marched on, till one day, when they felt as if they must have
got half round the earth, though they were scarcely four miles from the
camp, they found a large tree lying across their path. They looked at it
with dismay, and the oldest among them put their heads together to see
what was to be done.

'Can't we manage to get past by the top?' asked one.

'Why, it would take us YEARS,' exclaimed another. 'Just look at all
those tall green branches, spreading in every direction. If once we got
entangled in THEM, we should never get out again!'

'Well then, let us go round by the bottom,' said a third.

'How are we to do that, when the roots have made a deep hole, and above
that is a high bank?' replied a fourth. 'No; the only way I can think
of, is to burn a large hole in the trunk.' And this they did, but the
trunk was very thick, and would not burn through.

'It is no use, we must give it up,' they agreed at last. 'After all,
nobody need ever know! We have been away such a long while that we
might easily have had all sorts of adventures.' And so the whole company
turned homewards again.

They took even longer to go back than they had to come, for they were
tired and footsore with their journey. When they drew near the camp
they plucked up their courage, and began to sing a war-song. At this the
villagers came flocking to see what spoils the turtles had won, but, as
they approached, each turtle seized some one by the wrist, exclaiming:
'You are our spoils; you are our prisoners!'

'Now that I have got you I will keep you,' said the leader, who had
happened to seize his betrothed.

Everybody was naturally very angry at this behaviour, and the girl most
of all, and in her secret heart she determined to have her revenge. But,
just at present, the turtles were too strong, so the prisoners had to
put on their smartest slippers and their brightest clothes, and dance a
war dance while the turtles sang. They danced so long that it seemed as
if they would never stop, till the turtle who was leading the singing
suddenly broke into a loud chant:

Whoever comes here, will die, will die!

At this all the dancers grew so frightened that they burst through
the ring of their captors, and ran back to the village, the turtles
following--very slowly. On the way the chief turtle met a man, who said
to him:

'That woman who was to have been your wife has married another man!'

'Is that true?' said the turtle. 'Then I must see him.'

But as soon as the villager was out of sight the turtle stopped, and
taking a bundle containing fringes and ornaments from his back, he hung
them about him, so that they rattled as he walked. When he was quite
close to the hut where the woman lived, he cried out:

'Here I am to claim the woman who promised to be my wife.'

'Oh, here is the turtle,' whispered the husband hurriedly; 'what is to
be done now?'

'Leave that to me; I will manage him,' replied the wife, and at that
moment the turtle came in, and seized her by the wrist. 'Come with me,'
he said sternly.

'You broke your promise,' answered she. 'You said you would be back
soon, and it is more than a year since you went! How was I to know that
you were alive?'

At her words the husband took courage, and spoke hastily:

'Yes, you promised you would go to war and bring back some prisoners,
and you have not done it.'

'I DID go, and made many prisoners,' retorted the turtle angrily,
drawing out his knife. 'Look here, if she won't be MY wife, she sha'n't
be YOURS. I will cut her in two; and you shall have one half, and I the
other.'

'But half a woman is no use to me,' answered the man. 'If you want
her so much you had better take her.' And the turtle, followed by his
relations, carried her off to his own hut.

Now the woman saw she would gain nothing by being sulky, so she
pretended to be very glad to have got rid of her husband; but all
the while she was trying to invent a plan to deliver herself from the
turtle. At length she remembered that one of her friends had a large
iron pot, and when the turtle had gone to his room to put away his
fringes, she ran over to her neighbour's and brought it back. Then she
filled it with water and hung it over the fire to boil. It was just
beginning to bubble and hiss when the turtle entered.

'What are you doing there?' asked he, for he was always afraid of things
that he did not understand.

'Just warming some water,' she answered. 'Do you know how to swim?'

'Yes, of course I do. What a question! But what does it matter to you?'
said the turtle, more suspicious than ever.

'Oh, I only thought that after your long journey you might like to wash.
The roads are so muddy, after the winter's rains. I could rub your shell
for you till it was bright and shining again.

'Well, I AM rather muddy. If one is fighting, you know, one cannot stop
to pick one's way. I should certainly be more comfortable if my back was
washed.'

The woman did not wait for him to change his mind. She caught him up
by his shell and popped him straight into the pot, where he sank to the
bottom, and died instantly.

The other turtles, who were standing at the door, saw their leader
disappear, and felt it was their duty as soldiers to follow him;
and, springing into the pot, died too. All but one young turtle, who,
frightened at not seeing any of his friends come out again, went as fast
as he could to a clump of bushes, and from there made his way to the
river. His only thought was to get away as far as possible from that
dreadful hut; so he let the river carry him where it was going itself,
and at last, one day, he found himself in the warm sea, where, if he is
not dead, you may meet him still.

[Bureau of Ethnology.]