_THE PUNISHMENT OF THE FAIRY GANGANA_


Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who ruled over a country
so small that you could easily walk round it in one day. They were
both very good, simple people; not very wise, perhaps, but anxious to
be kind to everybody; and this was often a mistake, for the king
allowed all his subjects to talk at once, and offer advice upon the
government of the kingdom as well as upon private matters. And the end
of it all was, that it was very difficult to get any laws made, and,
still more, to get anyone to obey them.

Now, no traveller ever passed through the kingdom without inquiring
how it came to be so small. And this was the reason. As soon as
Petaldo (for that was the king's name) had been born, his father and
mother betrothed him to the niece of their friend the fairy
Gangana--if she should ever have one. But as the years passed on, and
Gangana was still without a niece, the young prince forgot all about
his destined bride, and when he was twenty-five he secretly married
the beautiful daughter of a rich farmer, with whom he had fallen
violently in love.

When the fairy heard the news she fell into a violent rage, and
hurried off to tell the king. The old man thought in his heart that
his son had waited quite long enough; but he did not dare to say so,
lest some dreadful spell might be thrown over them all, and they
should be changed into birds or snakes, or, worst of all, into
stones. So, much against his will, he was obliged to disinherit the
young man, and to forbid him to come to court. Indeed, he would have
been a beggar had it not been for the property his wife had had given
her by the farmer, which the youth obtained permission to erect into a
kingdom.

Most princes would have been very angry at this treatment, especially
as the old king soon died, and the queen was delighted to reign in his
place. But Petaldo was a contented young man, and was quite satisfied
with arranging his tiny court on the model of his father's, and having
a lord chamberlain, and a high steward and several gentlemen in
attendance; while the young queen appointed her own ladies-in-waiting
and maids of honour. He likewise set up a mint to coin money, and
chose a seneschal as head of the five policemen who kept order in the
capital and punished the boys who were caught in the act of throwing
stones at the palace windows.

The first to fill this important office was the young king's
father-in-law, an excellent man of the name of Caboche. He was much
beloved by everyone, and so sensible that he was not at all vain at
rising at once to the dignity of seneschal, when he had only been a
common farmer, but went about his fields every day as usual. This
conduct so struck his king that very soon he never did anything
without consulting him.

Each morning Caboche and his son-in-law had breakfast together, and
when they had finished, the king took out of his iron chest great
bundles of state papers, which he desired to talk over with his
seneschal. Sometimes they would spend two hours at least in deciding
these important matters, but more often after a few minutes Caboche
would say:

'Excuse me, sire, but your majesty does not understand this affair in
the least. Leave it to me, and I will settle it.'

'But what am I to do, then?' asked the king. And his minister
answered:

'Oh, you can rule your wife, and see after your fruit garden. You will
find that those two things will take up all your time.'

'Well, perhaps you are right,' the king replied; secretly glad to be
rid of the cares of government. But though Caboche did all the work,
Petaldo never failed to appear on grand occasions, in his royal mantle
of red linen, holding a sceptre of gilded wood. Meanwhile he passed
his mornings in studying books, from which he learned the proper
seasons to plant his fruit trees, and when they should be pruned; and
his afternoons in his garden, where he put his knowledge into
practice. In the evening he played cards with his father-in-law, and
supped in public with the queen, and by ten o'clock everybody in the
palace was fast asleep.

The queen, on her side, was quite as happy as her husband. She loved
to be in her dairy, and nobody in the kingdom could make such
delicious cheeses. But however busy she might be, she never forgot to
bake a little barley cake, and make a tiny cream cheese, and to put
them under a particular rose-tree in the garden. If you had asked her
whom they were for, and where they went to, she could not have told
you, but would have said that on the night of her marriage a fairy had
appeared to her in a dream, and had bidden her to perform this
ceremony.

After the king and the queen had six children, a little boy was born,
with a small red cap on his head, so that he was quite different from
his brothers and sisters, and his parents loved Cadichon better than
any of them.

The years went on, and the children were growing big, when, one day,
after Gillette the queen had finished baking her cake, and had turned
it out on a plate, a lovely blue mouse crept up the leg of the table
and ran to the plate. Instead of chasing it away, as most women would
have done, the queen pretended not to notice what the mouse was
doing, and was much surprised to see the little creature pick up the
cake and carry it off to the chimney. She sprang forwards to stop it,
when, suddenly, both the mouse and cake vanished, and in their place
stood an old woman only a foot high, whose clothes hung in rags about
her. Taking up a sharp pointed iron stick, she drew on the earthen
floor some strange signs, uttering seven cries as she did so, and
murmuring something in a low voice, among which the queen was sure she
caught the words, 'faith,' 'wisdom,' 'happiness.' Then, seizing the
kitchen broom, she whirled it three times round her head, and
vanished. Immediately there arose a great noise in the next room, and
on opening the door, the queen beheld three large cockchafers, each
one with a princess between its feet, while the princes were seated on
the backs of three swallows. In the middle was a car formed of a
single pink shell, and drawn by two robin redbreasts, and in this car
Cadichon was sitting by the side of the blue mouse, who was dressed in
a splendid mantle of black velvet fastened under her chin. Before the
queen had recovered from her surprise, cockchafers, redbreasts, mouse
and children had all flown, singing, to the window, and disappeared
from view.

The loud shrieks of the queen brought her husband and father running
into the room, and when at last they made out from her broken
sentences what had really happened, they hastily snatched up some
stout sticks that were lying about and set off to the rescue--one
going in one direction and the other in another.

For at least an hour the queen sat sobbing where they had left her,
when at last she was roused by a piece of folded paper falling at her
feet. She stooped and picked it up eagerly, hoping that it might
contain some news of her lost children. It was very short, but when
she had read the few words, Gillette was comforted, for it bade her
take heart, as they were well and happy under the protection of a
fairy. 'On your own faith and prudence depend your happiness,' ended
the writer. 'It is I who have all these years eaten the food you
placed under the rose-tree, and some day I shall reward you for it.
"Everything comes to him who knows how to wait," is the advice given
by,--The Fairy of the Fields.'

Then the queen rose up, and bathed her face, and combed her shining
hair; and as she turned away from her mirror she beheld a linnet
sitting on her bed. No one would have known that it was anything but a
common linnet, and yesterday the queen would have thought so too. But
this morning so many wonderful things had happened that she did not
doubt for a moment that the writer of the letter was before her.

'Pretty linnet,' said she, 'I will try to do all you wish. Only give
me, I pray you, now and then, news of my little Cadichon.'

And the linnet flapped her wings and sang, and flew away. So the queen
knew that she had guessed rightly, and thanked her in her heart.

By-and-by the king and his seneschal returned, hungry and tired with
their fruitless search. They were amazed and rather angry to find the
queen, whom they had left weeping, quite cheerful. Could she _really_
care for her children so little and have forgotten them so soon? What
_could_ have caused this sudden change? But to all their questions
Gillette would only answer: 'Everything comes to him who knows how to
wait.'

'That is true,' replied her father; 'and, after all, your majesty must
remember that the revenues of your kingdom would hardly bear the cost
of seven princes and princesses brought up according to their rank. Be
grateful, then, to those who have relieved you of the burden.'

'You are right! You are always right!' cried the king, whose face once
more beamed with smiles. And life at the palace went on as before,
till Petaldo received a piece of news which disturbed him greatly.

The queen, his mother, who had for some time been a widow, suddenly
made up her mind to marry again, and her choice had fallen on the
young king of the Green Isles, who was younger than her own son, and,
besides, handsome and fond of pleasure, which Petaldo was not. Now the
grandmother, foolish though she was in many respects, had the sense to
see that a woman as old and as plain as she was, could hardly expect a
young man to fall in love with her, and that, if this was to happen,
it would be needful to find some spell which would bring back her
youth and beauty. Of course, the fairy Gangana could have wrought the
change with one wave of her wand; but unluckily the two were no longer
friends, because the fairy had tried hard to persuade the queen to
declare her niece heiress to the crown, which the queen refused to do.
Naturally, therefore, it was no use asking the help of Gangana to
enable the queen to take a second husband, who would be certain to
succeed her; and messengers were sent all over the neighbouring
kingdoms, seeking to find a witch or a fairy who would work the
wished-for miracle. None, however, could be found with sufficient
skill, and at length the queen saw that if ever the king of the Green
Isles was to be her husband she must throw herself on the mercy of the
fairy Gangana.

The fairy's wrath was great when she heard the queen's story, but she
knew very well that, as the king of the Green Isles had spent all his
money, he would probably be ready to marry even an old woman, like her
friend, in order to get more. So, in order to gain time, she hid her
feelings, and told the queen that in three days the spell would be
accomplished.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her words made the queen so happy that twenty years seemed to fall
from her at once, and she counted, not only the hours, but the
minutes to the appointed time. It came at last, and the fairy stood
before her in a long robe of pink and silver, held up by a tiny brown
dwarf, who carried a small box under his arm. The queen received her
with all the marks of respect that she could think of, and at the
request of Gangana, ordered the doors and windows of the great hall to
be closed, and her attendants to retire, so that she and her guest
might be quite alone. Then, opening the box, which was presented to
her on one knee by the dwarf, the fairy took from it a small vellum
book with silver clasps, a wand that lengthened out as you touched it,
and a crystal bottle filled with very clear green water. She next bade
the queen sit on a seat in the middle of the room, and the dwarf to
stand opposite her, after which she stooped down and drew three
circles round them with a golden rod, touched each of them thrice with
her wand, and sprinkled the liquid over both. Gradually the queen's
big features began to grow smaller and her face fresher, while at the
same time the dwarf became about twice as tall as he had been before.
This sight, added to the blue flames which sprang up from the three
circles, so frightened the queen that she fainted in her chair, and
when she recovered, both the page and the fairy had vanished.

At first she felt vaguely puzzled, not remembering clearly what had
happened; then it all came back to her, and jumping up she ran to the
nearest mirror. Oh! how happy she was! Her long nose and her
projecting teeth had become things of beauty, her hair was thick and
curly, and bright gold. The fairy had indeed fulfilled her promise!
But, in her hurry and pleasure, the queen never noticed that she had
not been changed into a beautiful young lady, but into a very tall
little girl of eight or nine years old! Instead of her magnificent
velvet dress, edged with fur and embroidered in gold, she wore a
straight muslin frock, with a little lace apron, while her hair,
which was always combed and twisted and fastened with diamond pins,
hung in curls down her back. But if she had only known, something
besides this had befallen her, for except as regards her love for the
king of the Green Isles, her mind as well as her face had become that
of a child, and this her courtiers were aware of, if she was not. Of
course they could not imagine what had occurred, and did not know how
to behave themselves, till the chief minister set them the example by
ordering his wife and daughters to copy the queen's clothes and way of
speaking. Then, in a short time, the whole court, including the men,
talked and dressed like children, and played with dolls, or little tin
soldiers, while at the state dinners nothing was seen but iced fruits,
or sweet cakes made in the shape of birds and horses. But whatever she
might be doing, the queen hardly ceased talking about the king of the
Green Isles, whom she always spoke of as 'my little husband,' and as
weeks passed on, and he did not come, she began to get very cross and
impatient, so that her courtiers kept away from her as much as they
could. By this time, too, they were growing tired of pretending to be
children, and whispered their intention of leaving the palace and
taking service under a neighbouring sovereign, when, one day, a loud
blast of trumpets announced the arrival of the long-expected guest. In
an instant all was smiles again, and in spite of the strictest rules
of court etiquette, the queen insisted on receiving the young king at
the bottom of the stairs. Unfortunately, in her haste, she fell over
her dress, and rolled down several steps, screaming like a child, from
fright. She was not really much hurt, though she had scratched her
nose and bruised her forehead, but she was obliged to be carried to
her room and have her face bathed in cold water. Still, in spite of
this, she gave strict orders that the king should be brought to her
presence the moment he entered the palace.

A shrill blast outside her door sent a twinge of pain through the
queen's head, which by this time was aching badly; but in her joy at
welcoming her future husband she paid no heed to it. Between two lines
of courtiers, bowing low, the young king advanced quickly; but at the
sight of the queen and her bandages, broke out into such violent fits
of laughter that he was forced to leave the room, and even the palace.

When the queen had recovered from the vexation caused by the king's
rude behaviour, she bade her attendants to hasten after him and fetch
him back, but no promises or entreaties would persuade him to return.
This of course made the queen's temper even worse than it was before,
and a plot was set on foot to deprive her of the crown, which would
certainly have succeeded had not the fairy Gangana, who had only
wished to prevent her marriage, restored her to her proper shape. But,
far from thanking her friend for this service, the sight of her old
face in the mirror filled her with despair; and from that day she
hated Gangana with a deadly hatred.

And where were Petaldo's children all this while? Why, in the island
of Bambini, where they had playfellows to their hearts' content, and
plenty of fairies to take care of them all. But out of all the seven
princes and princesses whom the queen had seen carried off through the
window, there was only Cadichon who was good and obedient; the other
six were so rude and quarrelsome that they could get no one to play
with them, and at last, as a punishment, the fairy changed them all
into marionettes, till they should learn to behave better.

Now, in an unlucky moment, the Fairy of the Fields determined to visit
her friend the queen of the fairies, who lived in a distant island, in
order to consult her as to what was to become of Cadichon.

As she was entering the Hall of Audience, Gangana was leaving it, and
sharp words were exchanged between them. After her enemy had flown off
in a rage, the Fairy of the Fields poured out the whole story of
Gangana's wickedness to the queen, and implored her counsel.

'Be comforted,' answered the fairy queen. 'For a while she must work
her will, and at this moment she is carrying off Cadichon to the
island where she still holds her niece captive. But should she make an
evil use of the power she has, her punishment will be swift and great.
And now I will give you this precious phial. Guard it carefully, for
the liquid it contains will cause you to become invisible, and safe
from the piercing eyes of all fairies. Against the eyes of mortals it
has no charm!'

With a heart somewhat lighter, the Fairy of the Fields returned to her
own island, and, the better to protect the six new marionettes from
the wicked fairy, she sprinkled them with a few drops of the liquid,
only avoiding just the tips of their noses, so that she might be able
to know them again. Then she set off for the kingdom of Petaldo, which
she found in a state of revolt, because for the first time since he
had ascended the throne he had dared to impose a tax. Indeed, matters
might have ended in a war, or in cutting off the king's head, had not
the fairy discovered a means of contenting everybody, and of
whispering anew to the queen that all was well with her children, for
she dared not tell her of the loss of Cadichon.

And what had become of Cadichon? Well, the Fairy of the Fields had
found out--by means of her books, which had told her--that the poor
little boy had been placed by Gangana in an enchanted island, round
which flowed a rapid river, sweeping rocks and trees in its current.
Besides the river, the island was guarded by twenty-four enormous
dragons, breathing flames, and forming a rampart of fire which it
seemed as if none could pass.

The Fairy of the Fields knew all this, but she had a brave heart, and
determined that by some means or other she would overcome all
obstacles, and rescue Cadichon from the power of Gangana. So, taking
with her the water of invisibility, she sprinkled it over her, and
mounting her favourite winged lizard, set out for the island. When it
appeared in sight she wrapped herself in her fireproof mantle; then,
bidding the lizard return home, she slipped past the dragons and
entered the island.

Scarcely had she done so than she beheld Gangana approaching her,
talking loudly and angrily to a genius who flew by her side. From what
she said, the fairy learned that Petaldo's mother, the old queen, had
died of rage on hearing of the marriage of the king of the Green Isles
to a young and lovely bride, and instead of leaving her kingdom to
Gangana, had bequeathed it to one of the children of her son Petaldo.

'But all the trouble I have had with that foolish old woman shall not
go for nothing,' cried Gangana. 'Go at once to my stables, and fetch
out the strongest and swiftest griffins you can find in the stalls,
and harness them to the yellow coach. Drive this, with all the speed
you may, to the Isle of Bambini, and carry off the six children of
Petaldo that are still there. I will see to Petaldo and Gillette
myself. When I have got them all safe here I will change the parents
into rabbits and the children into dogs. As for Cadichon, I have not
quite made up my mind what I shall do with him.'

The Fairy of the Fields did not wait to hear more. No time was to be
lost in seeking the help of the fairy queen if Petaldo and his family
were to be saved from this dreadful doom. So, without waiting to
summon her lizard, she flew across the island and past the dragons
till her feet once more touched the ground again. But at that instant
a black cloud rolled over her, loud thunder rent the air, and the
earth rocked beneath her. Then wild lightnings lit up the sky, and by
their flashes she saw the four-and-twenty dragons fighting together,
uttering shrieks and yells, till the whole earth must have heard the
uproar. Trembling with terror, the fairy stood rooted to the spot; and
when day broke, island, torrent, and dragons had vanished, and in
their stead was a barren rock. On the summit of the rock stood a black
ostrich, and on its back were seated Cadichon, and the little niece of
the fairy Gangana, for whose sake she had committed so many evil
deeds. While the Fairy of the Fields was gazing in surprise at this
strange sight, the ostrich spread its wings and flew off in the
direction of the Fortunate Isle, and, followed unseen by the good
fairy, entered the great hall where the queen was sitting on her
throne.

Proud and exultant was Gangana in her new shape, for, by all the laws
of fairydom, if she succeeded in laying Cadichon at the feet of the
queen, and received him back from her, he was in her power for life,
and she might do with him as she would. This the good fairy knew well,
and pressed on with all her strength, for the dreadful events of the
night had almost exhausted her. But, with a mighty effort, she
snatched the children away from the back of the ostrich, and placed
them on the lap of the queen.

With a scream of baffled rage the ostrich turned away, and Gangana
stood in her place, waiting for the doom which she had brought upon
herself.

'You have neglected all my warnings,' said the queen, speaking more
sternly than any fairy had ever heard her; 'and my sentence is that
during two hundred years you lose all your privileges as a fairy, and
under the form of an ostrich shall become the slave of the lowest and
wickedest of the genii whom you have made your friends. As for these
children, I shall keep them with me, and they shall be brought up at
my court.'

And so they were, until they grew up and were old enough to be
married. Then the Fairy of the Fields took them back to the kingdom of
the old queen, where Petaldo was now reigning. But the cares of state
proved too heavy both for him and Gillette, after the quiet life they
had led for so many years, and they were rejoiced to be able to lay
aside their crowns, and place them on the heads of Cadichon and his
bride, who was as good as she was beautiful, though she _was_ the
niece of the wicked Gangana! And so well had Cadichon learned the
lessons taught him at the court of the fairy queen, that never since
the kingdom _was_ a kingdom had the people been so well governed or so
happy. And they went about the streets and the fields smiling with joy
at the difference between the old times and the new, and whispering
softly to each other:

'Everything comes to him who knows how to wait.'

(From _Le Cabinet des Fees_.)