Which was the Foolishest?



In a little village that stood on a wide plain, where you could see
the sun from the moment he rose to the moment he set, there lived two
couples side by side. The men, who worked under the same master, were
quite good friends, but the wives were always quarrelling, and the
subject they quarrelled most about was--which of the two had the
stupidest husband.

Unlike most women--who think that anything that belongs to them must be
better than what belongs to anyone else--each thought her husband the
more foolish of the two.

'You should just see what he does!' one said to her neighbour. 'He puts
on the baby's frock upside down, and, one day, I found him trying to
feed her with boiling soup, and her mouth was scalded for days after.
Then he picks up stones in the road and sows them instead of potatoes,
and one day he wanted to go into the garden from the top window, because
he declared it was a shorter way than through the door.'

'That is bad enough, of course,' answered the other; 'but it is really
NOTHING to what I have to endure every day from MY husband. If, when
I am busy, I ask him to go and feed the poultry, he is certain to give
them some poisonous stuff instead of their proper food, and when I visit
the yard next I find them all dead. Once he even took my best bonnet,
when I had gone away to my sick mother, and when I came back I found he
had given it to the hen to lay her eggs in. And you know yourself that,
only last week, when I sent him to buy a cask of butter, he returned
driving a hundred and fifty ducks which someone had induced him to take,
and not one of them would lay.'

'Yes, I am afraid he IS trying,' replied the first; 'but let us put them
to the proof, and see which of them is the most foolish.'

So, about the time that she expected her husband home from work, she got
out her spinning-wheel, and sat busily turning it, taking care not even
to look up from her work when the man came in. For some minutes he stood
with his mouth open watching her, and as she still remained silent, he
said at last:

'Have you gone mad, wife, that you sit spinning without anything on the
wheel?'

'YOU may think that there is nothing on it,' answered she, 'but I can
assure you that there is a large skein of wool, so fine that nobody can
see it, which will be woven into a coat for you.'

'Dear me!' he replied, 'what a clever wife I have got! If you had not
told me I should never have known that there was any wool on the wheel
at all. But now I really do seem to see something.'

The woman smiled and was silent, and after spinning busily for an hour
more, she got up from her stoop, and began to weave as fast as she
could. At last she got up, and said to her husband: 'I am too tired to
finish it to-night, so I shall go to bed, and to-morrow I shall only
have the cutting and stitching to do.'

So the next morning she got up early, and after she had cleaned her
house, and fed her chickens, and put everything in its place again, she
bent over the kitchen table, and the sound of her big scissors might
be heard snip! snap! as far as the garden. Her husband could not see
anything to snip at; but then he was so stupid that was not surprising!

After the cutting came the sewing. The woman patted and pinned and fixed
and joined, and then, turning to the man, she said:

'Now it is ready for you to try on.' And she made him take off his coat,
and stand up in front of her, and once more she patted an pinned and
fixed and joined, and was very careful in smoothing out every wrinkle.

'It does not feel very warm,' observed the man at last, when he had
borne all this patiently for a long time.

'That is because it is so fine,' answered she; 'you do not want it to be
as thick as the rough clothes you wear every day.'

He DID, but was ashamed to say so, and only answered: 'Well, I am sure
it must be beautiful since you say so, and I shall be smarter than
anyone in the whole village. "What a splendid coat!" they will exclaim
when they see me. But it is not everybody who has a wife as clever as
mine.'

Meanwhile the other wife was not idle. As soon as her husband entered
she looked at him with such a look of terror that the poor man was quite
frightened.

'Why do you stare at me so? Is there anything the matter?' asked he.

'Oh! go to bed at once,' she cried; 'you must be very ill indeed to look
like that!'

The man was rather surprised at first, as he felt particularly well that
evening; but the moment his wife spoke he became quite certain that he
had something dreadful the matter with him, and grew quite pale.

'I dare say it would be the best place for me,' he answered, trembling;
and he suffered his wife to take him upstairs, and to help him off with
his clothes.

'If you sleep well during the might there MAY be a chance for you,' said
she, shaking her head, as she tucked him up warmly; 'but if not--' And
of course the poor man never closed an eye till the sun rose.

'How do you feel this morning?' asked the woman, coming in on tip-toe
when her house-work was finished.

'Oh, bad; very bad indeed,' answered he; 'I have not slept for a moment.
Can you think of nothing to make me better?'

'I will try everything that is possible,' said the wife, who did not in
the least wish her husband to die, but was determined to show that he
was more foolish that the other man. 'I will get some dried herbs and
make you a drink, but I am very much afraid that it is too late. Why did
you not tell me before?'

'I thought perhaps the pain would go off in a day or two; and, besides,
I did not want to make you unhappy,' answered the man, who was by this
time quite sure he had been suffering tortures, and had borne them like
a hero. 'Of course, if I had had any idea how ill I really was, I should
have spoken at once.'

'Well, well, I will see what can be done,' said the wife, 'but talking
is not good for you. Lie still, and keep yourself warm.'

All that day the man lay in bed, and whenever his wife entered the room
and asked him, with a shake of the head, how he felt, he always replied
that he was getting worse. At last, in the evening, she burst into
tears, and when he inquired what was the matter, she sobbed out:

'Oh, my poor, poor husband, are you really dead? I must go to-morrow and
order your coffin.'

Now, when the man heard this, a cold shiver ran through his body, and
all at once he knew that he was as well as he had ever been in his life.

'Oh, no, no!' he cried, 'I feel quite recovered! Indeed, I think I shall
go out to work.'

'You will do no such thing,' replied his wife. 'Just keep quite quiet,
for before the sun rises you will be a dead man.'

The man was very frightened at her words, and lay absolutely still while
the undertaker came and measured him for his coffin; and his wife gave
orders to the gravedigger about his grave. That evening the coffin was
sent home, and in the morning at nine o'clock the woman put him on a
long flannel garment, and called to the undertaker's men to fasten down
the lid and carry him to the grave, where all their friends were waiting
them. Just as the body was being placed in the ground the other woman's
husband came running up, dressed, as far as anyone could see, in no
clothes at all. Everybody burst into shouts of laughter at the sight of
him, and the men laid down the coffin and laughed too, till their sides
nearly split. The dead man was so astonished at this behaviour, that he
peeped out of a little window in the side of the coffin, and cried out:

'I should laugh as loudly as any of you, if I were not a dead man.'

When they heard the voice coming from the coffin the other people
suddenly stopped laughing, and stood as if they had been turned into
stone. Then they rushed with one accord to the coffin, and lifted the
lid so that the man could step out amongst them.

'Were you really not dead after all?' asked they. 'And if not, why did
you let yourself be buried?'

At this the wives both confessed that they had each wished to prove that
her husband was stupider than the other. But the villagers declared that
they could not decide which was the most foolish--the man who allowed
himself to be persuaded that he was wearing fine clothes when he was
dressed in nothing, or the man who let himself be buried when he was
alive and well.

So the women quarrelled just as much as they did before, and no one ever
knew whose husband was the most foolish.

[Adapted from the Neuislandische Volksmarchen.]



Asmund and Signy



Long, long ago, in the days when fairies, witches, giants and ogres
still visited the earth, there lived a king who reigned over a great and
beautiful country. He was married to a wife whom he dearly loved, and
had two most promising children--a son called Asmund, and a daughter who
was named Signy.

The king and queen were very anxious to bring their children up well,
and the young prince and princess were taught everything likely to
make them clever and accomplished. They lived at home in their father's
palace, and he spared no pains to make their lives happy.

Prince Asmund dearly loved all outdoor sports and an open-air life, and
from his earliest childhood he had longed to live entirely in the forest
close by. After many arguments and entreaties he succeeded in persuading
the king to give him two great oak trees for his very own.

'Now,' said he to his sister, 'I will have the trees hollowed out, and
then I will make rooms in them and furnish them so that I shall be able
to live out in the forest.'

'Oh, Asmund!' exclaimed Signy, 'what a delightful idea! Do let me come
too, and live in one of your trees. I will bring all my pretty things
and ornaments, and the trees are so near home we shall be quite safe in
them.'

Asmund, who was extremely fond of his sister, readily consented,
and they had a very happy time together, carrying over all their pet
treasures, and Signy's jewels and other ornaments, and arranging them in
the pretty little rooms inside the trees.

Unfortunately sadder days were to come. A war with another country broke
out, and the king had to lead his army against their enemy. During his
absence the queen fell ill, and after lingering for some time she died,
to the great grief of her children. They made up their minds to live
altogether for a time in their trees, and for this purpose they had
provisions enough stored up inside to last them a year.

Now, I must tell you, in another country a long way off, there reigned a
king who had an only son named Ring. Prince Ring had heard so much about
the beauty and goodness of Princess Signy that he determined to marry
her if possible. So he begged his father to let him have a ship for the
voyage, set sail with a favourable wind, and after a time landed in the
country where Signy lived.

The prince lost no time in setting out for the royal palace, and on his
way there he met such a wonderfully lovely woman that he felt he had
never seen such beauty in all his life. He stopped her and at once asked
who she was.

'I am Signy, the king's daughter,' was the reply.

Then the prince inquired why she was wandering about all by herself, and
she told him that since her mother's death she was so sad that whilst
her father was away she preferred being alone.

Ring was quite deceived by her, and never guessed that she was not
Princess Signy at all, but a strong, gigantic, wicked witch bent on
deceiving him under a beautiful shape. He confided to her that he had
travelled all the way from his own country for her sake, having fallen
in love with the accounts he had heard of her beauty, and he then and
there asked her to be his wife.

The witch listened to all he said and, much pleased, ended by accepting
his offer; but she begged him to return to his ship for a little while
as she wished to go some way further into the forest, promising to join
him later on.

Prince Ring did as she wished and went back to his ship to wait, whilst
she walked on into the forest till she reached the two oak trees.

Here she resumed her own gigantic shape, tore up the trees by their
roots, threw one of them over her back and clasped the other to her
breast, carried them down to the shore and waded out with them to the
ship.

She took care not to be noticed as she reached the ship, and directly
she got on board she once more changed to her former lovely appearance
and told the prince that her luggage was now all on board, and that they
need wait for nothing more.

The prince gave orders to set sail at once, and after a fine voyage
landed in his own country, where his parents and his only sister
received him with the greatest joy and affection.

The false Signy was also very kindly welcomed. A beautiful house was got
ready for her, and Prince Ring had the two oaks planted in the garden
just in front of her windows so that she might have the pleasure of
seeing them constantly. He often went to visit the witch, whom he
believed to be Princess Signy, and one day he asked: 'Don't you think we
might be married before long?'

'Yes,' said she, quite pleased, 'I am quite ready to marry you whenever
you like.'

'Then,' replied Ring, 'let us decide on this day fortnight. And see, I
have brought you some stuff to make your wedding-dress of.' So saying
he gave her a large piece of the most beautiful brocade, all woven over
with gold threads, and embroidered with pearls and other jewels.

The prince had hardly left her before the witch resumed her proper shape
and tore about the room, raging and storming and flinging the beautiful
silk on the floor.

'What was SHE to do with such things?' she roared. 'SHE did not know how
to sew or make clothes, and she was sure to die of starvation into the
bargain if her brother Ironhead did not come soon and bring her some raw
meat and bones, for she really could eat nothing else.'

As she was raving and roaring in this frantic manner part of the floor
suddenly opened and a huge giant rose up carrying a great chest in his
arms. The witch was enchanted at this sight, and eagerly helped her
brother to set down and open the chest, which was full of the ghastly
food she had been longing for. The horrid pair set to and greedily
devoured it all, and when the chest was quite empty the giant put it on
his shoulder and disappeared as he had come, without leaving any trace
of his visit.

But his sister did not keep quiet for long, and tore and pulled at the
rich brocade as if she wanted to destroy it, stamping about and shouting
angrily.

Now, all this time Prince Asmund and his sister sat in their trees just
outside the window and saw all that was going on.

'Dear Signy,' said Asmund, 'do try to get hold of that piece of brocade
and make the clothes yourself, for really we shall have no rest day or
night with such a noise.'

'I will try,' said Signy; 'it won't be an easy matter, but it's worth
while taking some trouble to have a little peace.'

So she watched for an opportunity and managed to carry off the brocade
the first time the witch left her room. Then she set to work, cutting
out and sewing as best she could, and by the end of six days she had
turned it into an elegant robe with a long train and a mantle. When it
was finished she climbed to the top of her tree and contrived to throw
the clothes on to a table through the open window.

How delighted the witch was when she found the clothes all finished! The
next time Prince Ring came to see her she gave them to him, and he paid
her many compliments on her skilful work, after which he took leave of
her in the most friendly manner. But he had scarcely left the house when
the witch began to rage as furiously as ever, and never stopped till her
brother Ironhead appeared.

When Asmund saw all these wild doings from his tree he felt he could no
longer keep silence. He went to Prince Ring and said: 'Do come with
me and see the strange things that are happening in the new princess's
room.'

The prince was not a little surprised, but he consented to hide himself
with Asmund behind the panelling of the room, from where they could see
all that went on through a little slit. The witch was raving and roaring
as usual, and said to her brother:

'Once I am married to the king's son I shall be better off than now.
I shall take care to have all that pack of courtiers put to death, and
then I shall send for all my relations to come and live here instead.
I fancy the giants will enjoy themselves very much with me and my
husband.'

When Prince Ring heard this he fell into such a rage that he ordered the
house to be set on fire, and it was burnt to the ground, with the witch
and her brother in it.

Asmund then told the prince about the two oak trees and took him to see
them. The prince was quite astonished at them and at all their contents,
but still more so at the extreme beauty of Signy. He fell in love with
her at once, and entreated her to marry him, which, after a time, she
consented to do. Asmund, on his side, asked for the hand of Prince
Ring's sister, which was gladly granted him, and the double wedding was
celebrated with great rejoicings.

After this Prince Asmund and his bride returned to his country to live
with the king his father. The two couples often met, and lived happily
for many, many years. And that is the end of the story.

[From Islandische Mahrchen.]