An Impossible Enchantment


There once lived a king who was much loved by his people, and he, too,
loved them warmly. He led a very happy life, but he had the greatest
dislike to the idea of marrying, nor had he ever felt the slightest
wish to fall in love. His subjects begged him to marry, and at last he
promised to try to do so. But as, so far, he had never cared for any
woman he had seen, he made up his mind to travel in hopes of meeting
some lady he could love.

So he arranged all the affairs of state in an orderly manner, and set
out, attended by only one equerry, who, though not very clever, had most
excellent good sense. These people indeed generally make the best fellow
travellers.

The king explored several countries, doing all he could to fall in love,
but in vain; and at the end of two years' journeys he turned his face
towards home, with as free a heart as when he set out.

As he was riding along through a forest he suddenly heard the most awful
miawing and shrieking of cats you can imagine. The noise drew nearer,
and nearer, and at last they saw a hundred huge Spanish cats rush
through the trees close to them. They were so closely packed together
that you could easily have covered them with a large cloak, and all
were following the same track. They were closely pursued by two enormous
apes, dressed in purple suits, with the prettiest and best made boots
you ever saw.

The apes were mounted on superb mastiffs, and spurred them on in hot
haste, blowing shrill blasts on little toy trumpets all the time.

The king and his equerry stood still to watch this strange hunt, which
was followed by twenty or more little dwarfs, some mounted on wolves,
and leading relays, and others with cats in leash. The dwarfs were all
dressed in purple silk liveries like the apes.

A moment later a beautiful young woman mounted on a tiger came in sight.
She passed close to the king, riding at full speed, without taking any
notice of him; but he was at once enchanted by her, and his heart was
gone in a moment.

To his great joy he saw that one of the dwarfs had fallen behind the
rest, and at once began to question him.

The dwarf told him that the lady he had just seen was the Princess
Mutinosa, the daughter of the king in whose country they were at that
moment. He added that the princess was very fond of hunting, and that
she was now in pursuit of rabbits.

The king then asked the way to the court, and having been told it,
hurried off, and reached the capital in a couple of hours.

As soon as he arrived, he presented himself to the king and queen, and
on mentioning his own name and that of his country, was received with
open arms. Not long after, the princess returned, and hearing that the
hunt had been very successful, the king complimented her on it, but she
would not answer a word.

Her silence rather surprised him, but he was still more astonished when
he found that she never spoke once all through supper-time. Sometimes
she seemed about to speak, but whenever this was the case her father or
mother at once took up the conversation. However, this silence did not
cool the king's affection, and when he retired to his rooms at night he
confided his feelings to his faithful equerry. But the equerry was by no
means delighted at his king's love affair, and took no pains to hide his
disappointment.

'But why are you vexed?' asked the king. 'Surely the princess is
beautiful enough to please anyone?'

'She is certainly very handsome,' replied the equerry, 'but to be really
happy in love something more than beauty is required. To tell the truth,
sire,' he added, 'her expression seems to me hard.'

'That is pride and dignity,' said the king, 'and nothing can be more
becoming.'

'Pride or hardness, as you will,' said the equerry; 'but to my mind the
choice of so many fierce creatures for her amusements seems to tell of
a fierce nature, and I also think there is something suspicious in the
care taken to prevent her speaking.'

The equerry's remarks were full of good sense; but as opposition is only
apt to increase love in the hearts of men, and especially of kings who
hate being contradicted, this king begged, the very next day, for the
hand of the Princess Mutinosa. It was granted him on two conditions.

The first was that the wedding should take place the very next day; and
the second, that he should not speak to the princess till she was
his wife; to all of which the king agreed, in spite of his equerry's
objections, so that the first word he heard his bride utter was the
'Yes' she spoke at their marriage.

Once married, however, she no longer placed any check on herself, and
her ladies-in-waiting came in for plenty of rude speeches----even the
king did not escape scolding; but as he was a good-tempered man, and
very much in love, he bore it patiently. A few days after the wedding
the newly married pair set out for their kingdom without leaving many
regrets behind.

The good equerry's fears proved only too true, as the king found out
to his cost. The young queen made her self most disagreeable to all her
court, her spite and bad temper knew no bounds, and before the end of a
month she was known far and wide as a regular vixen.

One day, when riding out, she met a poor old woman walking along
the road, who made a curtsy and was going on, when the queen had her
stopped, and cried: 'You are a very impertinent person; don't you know
that I am the queen? And how dare you not make me a deeper curtsy?'

'Madam,' said the old woman, 'I have never learnt how to measure
curtsies; but I had no wish to fail in proper respect.'

'What!' screamed the queen; 'she dares to answer! Tie her to my horse's
tail and I'll just carry her at once to the best dancing-master in the
town to learn how to curtsy.'

The old woman shrieked for mercy, but the queen would not listen, and
only mocked when she said she was protected by the fairies. At last the
poor old thing submitted to be tied up, but when the queen urged her
horse on he never stirred. In vain she spurred him, he seemed turned to
bronze. At the same moment the cord with which the old woman was tied
changed into wreaths of flowers, and she herself into a tall and stately
lady.

Looking disdainfully at the queen, she said, 'Bad woman, unworthy of
your crown; I wished to judge for myself whether all I heard of you was
true. I have now no doubt of it, and you shall see whether the fairies
are to be laughed at.'

So saying the fairy Placida (that was her name) blew a little gold
whistle, and a chariot appeared drawn by six splendid ostriches. In it
was seated the fairy queen, escorted by a dozen other fairies mounted on
dragons.

All having dismounted, Placida told her adventures, and the fairy queen
approved all she had done, and proposed turning Mutinosa into bronze
like her horse.

Placida, however, who was very kind and gentle, begged for a milder
sentence, and at last it was settled that Mutinosa should become her
slave for life unless she should have a child to take her place.

The king was told of his wife's fate and submitted to it, which, as he
could do nothing to help it, was the only course open to him.

The fairies then all dispersed, Placida taking her slave with her, and
on reaching her palace she said: 'You ought by rights to be scullion,
but as you have been delicately brought up the change might be too great
for you. I shall therefore only order you to sweep my rooms carefully,
and to wash and comb my little dog.'

Mutinosa felt there was no use in disobeying, so she did as she was bid
and said nothing.

After some time she gave birth to a most lovely little girl, and when
she was well again the fairy gave her a good lecture on her past life,
made her promise to behave better in future, and sent her back to the
king, her husband.

Placida now gave herself up entirely to the little princess who was left
in her charge. She anxiously thought over which of the fairies she would
invite to be godmothers, so as to secure the best gift, for her adopted
child.

At last she decided on two very kindly and cheerful fairies, and asked
them to the christening feast. Directly it was over the baby was
brought to them in a lovely crystal cradle hung with red silk curtains
embroidered with gold.

The little thing smiled so sweetly at the fairies that they decided to
do all they could for her. They began by naming her Graziella, and then
Placida said: 'You know, dear sisters, that the commonest form of
spite or punishment amongst us consists of changing beauty to ugliness,
cleverness to stupidity, and oftener still to change a person's form
altogether. Now, as we can only each bestow one gift, I think the
best plan will be for one of you to give her beauty, the other good
understanding, whilst I will undertake that she shall never be changed
into any other form.'

The two godmothers quite agreed, and as soon as the little princess had
received their gifts, they went home, and Placida gave herself up to the
child's education. She succeeded so well with it, and little Graziella
grew so lovely, that when she was still quite a child her fame was
spread abroad only too much, and one day Placida was surprised by
a visit from the Fairy Queen, who was attended by a very grave and
severe-looking fairy.

The queen began at once: 'I have been much surprised by your behaviour
to Mutinosa; she had insulted our whole race, and deserved punishment.
You might forgive your own wrongs if you chose, but not those of others.
You treated her very gently whilst she was with you, and I come now to
avenge our wrongs on her daughter. You have ensured her being lovely and
clever, and not subject to change of form, but I shall place her in an
enchanted prison, which she shall never leave till she finds herself
in the arms of a lover whom she herself loves. It will be my care to
prevent anything of the kind happening.'

The enchanted prison was a large high tower in the midst of the sea,
built of shells of all shapes and colours. The lower floor was like a
great bathroom, where the water was let in or off at will. The first
floor contained the princess's apartments, beautifully furnished. On
the second was a library, a large wardrobe-room filled with beautiful
clothes and every kind of linen, a music-room, a pantry with bins
full of the best wines, and a store-room with all manner of preserves,
bonbons, pastry and cakes, all of which remained as fresh as if just out
of the oven.

The top of the tower was laid out like a garden, with beds of the
loveliest flowers, fine fruit trees, and shady arbours and shrubs, where
many birds sang amongst the branches.

The fairies escorted Graziella and her governess, Bonnetta, to the
tower, and then mounted a dolphin which was waiting for them. At a
little distance from the tower the queen waved her wand and summoned two
thousand great fierce sharks, whom she ordered to keep close guard, and
not to let a soul enter the tower.

The good governess took such pains with Graziella's education that when
she was nearly grown up she was not only most accomplished, but a very
sweet, good girl.

One day, as the princess was standing on a balcony, she saw the most
extraordinary figure rise out of the sea. She quickly called Bonnetta to
ask her what it could be. It looked like some kind of man, with a bluish
face and long sea-green hair. He was swimming towards the tower, but the
sharks took no notice of him.

'It must be a merman,' said Bonnetta.

'A man, do you say?' cried Graziella; 'let us hurry down to the door and
see him nearer.'

When they stood in the doorway the merman stopped to look at the
princess and made many signs of admiration. His voice was very hoarse
and husky, but when he found that he was not understood he took to
signs. He carried a little basket made of osiers and filled with rare
shells, which he presented to the princess.

She took it with signs of thanks; but as it was getting dusk she
retired, and the merman plunged back into the sea.

When they were alone, Graziella said to her governess: 'What a
dreadful-looking creature that was! Why do those odious sharks let him
come near the tower? I suppose all men are not like him?'

'No, indeed,' replied Bonnetta. 'I suppose the sharks look on him as a
sort of relation, and so did not attack him.'

A few days later the two ladies heard a strange sort of music, and
looking out of the window, there was the merman, his head crowned with
water plants, and blowing a great sea-shell with all his might.

They went down to the tower door, and Graziella politely accepted some
coral and other marine curiosities he had brought her. After this he
used to come every evening, and blow his shell, or dive and play antics
under the princess's window. She contented herself with bowing to him
from the balcony, but she would not go down to the door in spite of all
his signs.

Some days later he came with a person of his own kind, but of another
sex. Her hair was dressed with great taste, and she had a lovely voice.
This new arrival induced the ladies to go down to the door. They were
surprised to find that, after trying various languages, she at last
spoke to them in their own, and paid Graziella a very pretty compliment
on her beauty.

The mermaid noticed that the lower floor was full of water. 'Why,' cried
she, 'that is just the place for us, for we can't live quite out of
water.' So saying, she and her brother swam in and took up a position in
the bathroom, the princess and her governess seating themselves on the
steps which ran round the room.

'No doubt, madam,' said the mermaid, 'you have given up living on land
so as to escape from crowds of lovers; but I fear that even here you
cannot avoid them, for my brother is already dying of love for you, and
I am sure that once you are seen in our city he will have many rivals.'

She then went on to explain how grieved her brother was not to be able
to make himself understood, adding: 'I interpret for him, having been
taught several languages by a fairy.'

'Oh, then, you have fairies, too?' asked Graziella, with a sigh.

'Yes, we have,' replied the mermaid; 'but if I am not mistaken you have
suffered from the fairies on earth.'

The princess, on this, told her entire history to the mermaid, who
assured her how sorry she felt for her, but begged her not to lose
courage; adding, as she took her leave: Perhaps, some day, you may find
a way out of your difficulties.'

The princess was delighted with this visit and with the hopes the
mermaid held out. It was something to meet someone fresh to talk to.

'We will make acquaintance with several of these people,' she said to
her governess, 'and I dare say they are not all as hideous as the first
one we saw. Anyhow, we shan't be so dreadfully lonely.'

'Dear me,' said Bonnetta, 'how hopeful young people are to be sure! As
for me I feel afraid of these folk. But what do you think of the lover
you have captivated?'

'Oh, I could never love him,' cried the princess; 'I can't bear him.
But, perhaps, as his sister says they are related to the fairy Marina,
they may be of some use to us.'

The mermaid often returned, and each time she talked of her brother's
love, and each time Graziella talked of her longing to escape from her
prison, till at length the mermaid promised to bring the fairy Marina to
see her, in hopes she might suggest something.

Next day the fairy came with the mermaid, and the princess received her
with delight. After a little talk she begged Graziella to show her the
inside of the tower and let her see the garden on the top, for with the
help of crutches she could manage to move about, and being a fairy could
live out of water for a long time, provided she wetted her forehead now
and then.

Graziella gladly consented, and Bonnetta stayed below with the mermaid.

When they were in the garden the fairy said: 'Let us lose no time, but
tell me how I can be of use to you.' Graziella then told all her story
and Marina replied: 'My dear princess, I can do nothing for you as
regards dry land, for my power does not reach beyond my own element. I
can only say that if you will honour my cousin by accepting his hand,
you could then come and live amongst us. I could teach you in a moment
to swim and dive with the best of us. I can harden your skin without
spoiling its colour. My cousin is one of the best matches in the sea,
and I will bestow so many gifts on him that you will be quite happy.'

The fairy talked so well and so long that the princess was rather
impressed, and promised to think the matter over.

Just as they were going to leave the garden they saw a ship sailing
nearer the tower than any other had done before. On the deck lay a young
man under a splendid awning, gazing at the tower through a spy-glass;
but before they could see anything clearly the ship moved away, and the
two ladies parted, the fairy promising to return shortly.

As soon as she was gone Graziella told her governess what she had said.
Bonnetta was not at all pleased at the turn matters were taking, for she
did not fancy being turned into a mermaid in her old age. She thought
the matter well over, and this was what she did. She was a very clever
artist, and next morning she began to paint a picture of a handsome
young man, with beautiful curly hair, a fine complexion, and lovely blue
eyes. When it was finished she showed it to Graziella, hoping it would
show her the difference there was between a fine young man and her
marine suitor.

The princess was much struck by the picture, and asked anxiously whether
there could be any man so good looking in the world. Bonnetta assured
her that there were plenty of them; indeed, many far handsomer.

'I can hardly believe that,' cried the princess; 'but, alas! If there
are, I don't suppose I shall ever see them or they me, so what is the
use? Oh, dear, how unhappy I am!'

She spent the rest of the day gazing at the picture, which certainly had
the effect of spoiling all the merman's hopes or prospects.

After some days, the fairy Marina came back to hear what was decided;
but Graziella hardly paid any attention to her, and showed such dislike
to the idea of the proposed marriage that the fairy went off in a
regular huff.

Without knowing it, the princess had made another conquest. On board the
ship which had sailed so near was the handsomest prince in the world. He
had heard of the enchanted tower, and determined to get as near it as he
could. He had strong glasses on board, and whilst looking through them
he saw the princess quite clearly, and fell desperately in love with her
at once. He wanted to steer straight for the tower and to row off to it
in a small boat, but his entire crew fell at his feet and begged him not
to run such a risk. The captain, too, urged him not to attempt it. 'You
will only lead us all to certain death,' he said. 'Pray anchor nearer
land, and I will then seek a kind fairy I know, who has always been most
obliging to me, and who will, I am sure, try to help your Highness.'

The prince rather unwillingly listened to reason. He landed at the
nearest point, and sent off the captain in all haste to beg the fairy's
advice and help. Meantime he had a tent pitched on the shore, and spent
all his time gazing at the tower and looking for the princess through
his spyglass.

After a few days the captain came back, bringing the fairy with him. The
prince was delighted to see her, and paid her great attention. 'I have
heard about this matter,' she said; 'and, to lose no time, I am going to
send off a trusty pigeon to test the enchantment. If there is any weak
spot he is sure to find it out and get in. I shall bid him bring a
flower back as a sign of success; and if he does so I quite hope to get
you in too.'

'But,' asked the prince, 'could I not send a line by the pigeon to tell
the princess of my love?'

'Certainly,' replied the fairy, 'it would be a very good plan.'

So the prince wrote as follows:---

 'Lovely Princess,---I adore you, and beg you to accept my heart,
and to believe there is nothing I will not do to end your
misfortunes.---BLONDEL.

This note was tied round the pigeon's neck, and he flew off with it at
once. He flew fast till he got near the tower, when a fierce wind blew
so hard against him that he could not get on. But he was not to be
beaten, but flew carefully round the top of the tower till he came to
one spot which, by some mistake, had not been enchanted like the rest.
He quickly slipped into the arbour and waited for the princess.

Before long Graziella appeared alone, and the pigeon at once fluttered
to meet her, and seemed so tame that she stopped to caress the pretty
creature. As she did so she saw it had a pink ribbon round its neck, and
tied to the ribbon was a letter. She read it over several times and then
wrote this answer:---

'You say you love me; but I cannot promise to love you without seeing
you. Send me your portrait by this faithful messenger. If I return it to
you, you must give up hope; but if I keep it you will know that to help
me will be to help yourself.---GRAZIELA.

Before flying back the pigeon remembered about the flower, so, seeing
one in the princess's dress, he stole it and flew away.

The prince was wild with joy at the pigeon's return with the note. After
an hour's rest the trusty little bird was sent back again, carrying a
miniature of the prince, which by good luck he had with him.

On reaching the tower the pigeon found the princess in the garden. She
hastened to untie the ribbon, and on opening the miniature case what was
her surprise and delight to find it very like the picture her governess
had painted for her. She hastened to send the pigeon back, and you can
fancy the prince's joy when he found she had kept his portrait.

'Now,' said the fairy, 'let us lose no more time. I can only make you
happy by changing you into a bird, but I will take care to give you back
your proper shape at the right time.'

The prince was eager to start, so the fairy, touching him with her wand,
turned him into the loveliest humming-bird you ever saw, at the same
time letting him keep the power of speech. The pigeon was told to show
him the way.

Graziella was much surprised to see a perfectly strange bird, and still
more so when it flew to her saying, 'Good-morning, sweet princess.'

She was delighted with the pretty creature, and let him perch on her
finger, when he said, 'Kiss, kiss, little birdie,' which she gladly did,
petting and stroking him at the same time.

After a time the princess, who had been up very early, grew tired, and
as the sun was hot she went to lie down on a mossy bank in the shade
of the arbour. She held the pretty bird near her breast, and was just
falling asleep, when the fairy contrived to restore the prince to his
own shape, so that as Graziella opened her eyes she found herself in the
arms of a lover whom she loved in return!

At the same moment her enchantment came to an end. The tower began to
rock and to split. Bonnetta hurried up to the top so that she might at
least perish with her dear princess. Just as she reached the garden, the
kind fairy who had helped the prince arrived with the fairy Placida, in
a car of Venetian glass drawn by six eagles.

'Come away quickly,' they cried, 'the tower is about to sink!' The
prince, princess, and Bonnetta lost no time in stepping into the car,
which rose in the air just as, with a terrible crash, the tower sank
into the depths of the sea, for the fairy Marina and the mermen had
destroyed its foundations to avenge themselves on Graziella. Luckily
their wicked plans were defeated, and the good fairies took their way to
the kingdom of Graziella's parents.

They found that Queen Mutinosa had died some years ago, but her kind
husband lived on peaceably, ruling his country well and happily. He
received his daughter with great delight, and there were universal
rejoicings at the return of the lovely princess.

The wedding took place the very next day, and, for many days after,
balls, dinners, tournaments, concerts and all sorts of amusements went
on all day and all night.

All the fairies were carefully invited, and they came in great state,
and promised the young couple their protection and all sorts of good
gifts. Prince Blondel and Princess Graziella lived to a good old age,
beloved by every one, and loving each other more and more as time went
on.