How Ball-carrier Finished His Task


After Ball-Carrier had managed to drown the Bad One so that he could not
do any more mischief, he forgot the way to his grandmother's house, and
could not find it again, though he searched everywhere. During this time
he wandered into many strange places, and had many adventures; and one
day he came to a hut where a young girl lived. He was tired and hungry
and begged her to let him in and rest, and he stayed a long while, and
the girl became his wife. One morning he saw two children playing in
front of the hut, and went out to speak to them. But as soon as they saw
him they set up cries of horror and ran away. 'They are the children of
my sister who has been on a long journey,' replied his wife, 'and now
that she knows you are my husband she wants to kill you.'

'Oh, well, let her try,' replied Ball-Carrier. 'It is not the first time
people have wished to do that. And here I am still, you see!'

'Be careful,' said the wife, 'she is very cunning.' But at this moment
the sister-in-law came up.

'How do you do, brother-in-law? I have heard of you so often that I am
very glad to meet you. I am told that you are more powerful than any man
on earth, and as I am powerful too, let us try which is the strongest.'

'That will be delightful,' answered he. 'Suppose we begin with a short
race, and then we will go on to other things.'

'That will suit me very well,' replied the woman, who was a witch. 'And
let us agree that the one who wins shall have the right to kill the
other.'

'Oh, certainly,' said Ball-Carrier;' and I don't think we shall find a
flatter course than the prairie itself--no one knows how many miles it
stretches. We will run to the end and back again.'

This being settled they both made ready for the race, and Ball-Carrier
silently begged the good spirits to help him, and not to let him fall
into the hands of this wicked witch.

'When the sun touches the trunk of that tree we will start,' said she,
as they both stood side by side. But with the first step Ball-Carrier
changed himself into a wolf and for a long way kept ahead. Then
gradually he heard her creeping up behind him, and soon she was in
front. So Ball-Carrier took the shape of a pigeon and flew rapidly past
her, but in a little while she was in front again and the end of the
prairie was in sight. 'A crow can fly faster than a pigeon,' thought he,
and as a crow he managed to pass her and held his ground so long that
he fancied she was quite beaten. The witch began to be afraid of it too,
and putting out all her strength slipped past him. Next he put on the
shape of a hawk, and in this form he reached the bounds of the prairie,
he and the witch turning homewards at the moment.

Bird after bird he tried, but every time the witch gained on him and
took the lead. At length the goal was in sight, and Ball-Carrier knew
that unless he could get ahead now he would be killed before his own
door, under the eyes of his wife. His eyes had grown dim from fatigue,
his wings flapped wearily and hardly bore him along, while the witch
seemed as fresh as ever. What bird was there whose flight was swifter
than his? Would not the good spirits tell him? Ah, of course he knew;
why had he not thought of it at first and spared himself all that
fatigue? And the next instant a humming bird, dressed in green and blue,
flashed past the woman and entered the house. The witch came panting up,
furious at having lost the race which she felt certain of winning; and
Ball-Carrier, who had by this time changed back into his own shape,
struck her on the head and killed her.

For a long while Ball-Carrier was content to stay quietly at home with
his wife and children, for he was tired of adventures, and only did
enough hunting to supply the house with food. But one day he happened to
eat some poisonous berries that he had found in the forest, and grew so
ill that he felt he was going to die.

'When I am dead do not bury me in the earth,' he said, 'but put me over
there, among that clump of trees.' So his wife and her three children
watched by him as long as he was alive, and after he was dead they took
him up and laid the body on a platform of stakes which they had prepared
in the grove. And as they returned weeping to the hut they caught
a glimpse of the ball rolling away down the path back to the old
grandmother. One of the sons sprang forward to stop it, for Ball-Carrier
had often told them the tale of how it had helped him to cross the
river, but it was too quick for him, and they had to content themselves
with the war club and bow and arrows, which were put carefully away.

By-and-by some travellers came past, and the chief among them asked
leave to marry Ball-Carrier's daughter. The mother said she must have a
little time to think over it, as her daughter was still very young; so
it was settled that the man should go away for a month with his friends,
and then come back to see if the girl was willing.

Now ever since Ball-Carrier's death the family had been very poor, and
often could not get enough to eat. One morning the girl, who had had
no supper and no breakfast, wandered off to look for cranberries, and
though she was quite near home was astonished at noticing a large hut,
which certainly had not been there when last she had come that way.
No one was about, so she ventured to peep in, and her surprise was
increased at seeing, heaped up in one corner, a quantity of food of all
sorts, while a little robin redbreast stood perched on a beam looking
down upon her.

'It is my father, I am sure,' she cried; and the bird piped in answer.

From that day, whenever they wanted food they went to the hut, and
though the robin could not speak, he would hop on their shoulders and
let them feed him with the food they knew he liked best.

When the man came back he found the girl looking so much prettier and
fatter than when he had left her, that he insisted that they should be
married on the spot. And the mother, who did not know how to get rid of
him, gave in.

The husband spent all his time in hunting, and the family had never had
so much meat before; but the man, who had seen for himself how poor they
were, noticed with amazement that they did not seem to care about it, or
to be hungry. 'They must get food from somewhere,' he thought, and one
morning, when he pretended to be going out to hunt, he hid in a thicket
to watch. Very soon they all left the house together, and walked to the
other hut, which the girl's husband saw for the first time, as it was
hid in a hollow. He followed, and noticed that each one went up to the
redbreast, and shook him by the claw; and he then entered boldly and
shook the bird's claw too. The whole party afterwards sat down to
dinner, after which they all returned to their own hut.

The next day the husband declared that he was very ill, and could not
eat anything; but this was only a presence so that he might get what he
wanted. The family were all much distressed, and begged him to tell them
what food he fancied.

'Oh! I could not eat any food,' he answered every time, and at each
answer his voice grew fainter and fainter, till they thought he would
die from weakness before their eyes.

'There must be some thing you could take, if you would only say what it
is,' implored his wife.

'No, nothing, nothing; except, perhaps--but of course that is
impossible!'

'No, I am sure it is not,' replied she; 'you shall have it, I
promise--only tell me what it is.'

'I think--but I could not ask you to do such a thing. Leave me alone,
and let me die quietly.'

'You shall not die,' cried the girl, who was very fond of her husband,
for he did not beat her as most girls' husbands did. 'Whatever it is, I
will manage to get it for you.'

'Well, then, I think, if I had that--redbreast, nicely roasted, I could
eat a little bit of his wing!'

The wife started back in horror at such a request; but the man turned
his face to the wall, and took no notice, as he thought it was better to
leave her to herself for a little.

Weeping and wringing her hands, the girl went down to her mother. The
brothers were very angry when they heard the story, and declared that,
if any one were to die, it certainly should not be the robin. But all
that night the man seemed getting weaker and weaker, and at last, quite
early, the wife crept out, and stealing to the hut, killed the bird, and
brought him home to her husband.

Just as she was going to cook it her two brothers came in. They cried
out in horror at the sight, and, rushing out of the hut, declared they
would never see her any more. And the poor girl, with a heavy heart,
took the body of the redbreast up to her husband.

But directly she entered the room the man told her that he felt a great
deal better, and that he would rather have a piece of bear's flesh, well
boiled, than any bird, however tender. His wife felt very miserable to
think that their beloved redbreast had been sacrificed for nothing, and
begged him to try a little bit.

'You felt so sure that it would do you good before,' said she, 'that I
can't help thinking it would quite cure you now.' But the man only flew
into a rage, and flung the bird out of the window. Then he got up and
went out.

Now all this while the ball had been rolling, rolling, rolling to the
old grandmother's hut on the other side of the world, and directly it
rolled into her hut she knew that her grandson must be dead. Without
wasting any time she took a fox skin and tied it round her forehead, and
fastened another round her waist, as witches always do when they leave
their own homes. When she was ready she said to the ball: 'Go back the
way you came, and lead me to my grandson.' And the ball started with the
old woman following.

It was a long journey, even for a witch, but, like other things, it
ended at last; and the old woman stood before the platform of stakes,
where the body of Ball-Carrier lay.

'Wake up, my grandson, it is time to go home,' the witch said. And
Ball-Carrier stepped down oft the platform, and brought his club and bow
and arrows out of the hut, and set out, for the other side of the world,
behind the old woman.

When they reached the hut where Ball-Carrier had fasted so many years
ago, the old woman spoke for the first time since they had started on
their way.

'My grandson, did you ever manage to get that gold from the Bad One?'

'Yes, grandmother, I got it.'

'Where is it?' she asked.

'Here, in my left arm-pit,' answered he.

So she picked up a knife and scraped away all the gold which had stuck
to his skin, and which had been sticking there ever since he first stole
it. After she had finished she asked again:

'My grandson, did you manage to get that bridge from the Bad One?'

'Yes, grandmother, I got that too,' answered he.

'Where is it?' she asked, and Ball-Carrier lifted his right arm, and
pointed to his arm-pit.

'Here is the bridge, grandmother,' said he.

Then the witch did something that nobody in the world could have guessed
that she would do. First, she took the gold and said to Ball-carrier:

'My grandson, this gold must be hidden in the earth, for if people think
they can get it when they choose, they will become lazy and stupid. But
if we take it and bury it in different parts of the world they will have
to work for it if they want it, and then will only find a little at a
time.' And as she spoke, she pulled up one of the poles of the hut, and
Ball-Carrier saw that underneath was a deep, deep hole, which seemed to
have no bottom. Down this hole she poured all the gold, and when it was
out of sight it ran about all over the world, where people that dig hard
sometimes find it. And after that was done she put the pole back again.

Next she lifted down a spade from a high shelf, where it had grown quite
rusty, and dug a very small hole on the opposite side of the hut--very
small, but very deep.

'Give me the bridge,' said she, 'for I am going to bury it here. If
anyone was to get hold of it, and find that they could cross rivers and
seas without any trouble, they would never discover how to cross them
for themselves. I am a witch, and if I had chosen I could easily have
cast my spells over the Bad One, and have made him deliver them to
you the first day you came into my hut. But then you would never have
fasted, and never have planned how to get what you wanted, and never
have known the good spirits, and would have been fat and idle to the end
of your days. And now go; in that hut, which you can just see far away,
live your father and mother, who are old people now, and need a son to
hunt for them. You have done what you were set to do, and I need you no
more.'

Then Ball-Carrier remembered his parents and went back to them.

[From Bureau of Ethnology. 'Indian Folklore.']