The Jogi's Punishment


Once upon a time there came to the ancient city of Rahmatabad a
jogi[FN#1: A Hindu holy man.] of holy appearance, who took up his abode
under a tree outside the city, where he would sit for days at a time
fasting from food and drink, motionless except for the fingers that
turned restlessly his string of beads. The fame of such holiness as this
soon spread, and daily the citizens would flock to see him, eager to
get his blessing, to watch his devotions, or to hear his teaching, if
he were in the mood to speak. Very soon the rajah himself heard of the
jogi, and began regularly to visit him to seek his counsel and to ask
his prayers that a son might be vouchsafed to him. Days passed by, and
at last the rajah became so possessed with the thought of the holy man
that he determined if possible to get him all to himself. So he built in
the neighbourhood a little shrine, with a room or two added to it, and a
small courtyard closely walled up; and, when all was ready, besought the
jogi to occupy it, and to receive no other visitors except himself and
his queen and such pupils as the jogi might choose, who would hand down
his teaching. To this the jogi consented; and thus he lived for some
time upon the king's bounty, whilst the fame of his godliness grew day
by day.

Now, although the rajah of Rahmatabad had no son, he possessed a
daughter, who as she grew up became the most beautiful creature that eye
ever rested upon. Her father had long before betrothed her to the son of
the neighbouring rajah of Dilaram, but as yet she had not been married
to him, and lived the quiet life proper to a maiden of her beauty and
position. The princess had of course heard of the holy man and of his
miracles and his fasting, and she was filled with curiosity to see and
to speak to him; but this was difficult, since she was not allowed to go
out except into the palace grounds, and then was always closely guarded.
However, at length she found an opportunity, and made her way one
evening alone to the hermit's shrine.

Unhappily, the hermit was not really as holy as he seemed; for no sooner
did he see the princess than he fell in love with her wonderful beauty,
and began to plot in his heart how he could win her for his wife. But
the maiden was not only beautiful, she was also shrewd; and as soon as
she read in the glance of the jogi the love that filled his soul, she
sprang to her feet, and, gathering her veil about her, ran from the
place as fast as she could. The jogi tried to follow, but he was no
match for her; so, beside himself with rage at finding that he could not
overtake her, he flung at her a lance, which wounded her in the leg. The
brave princess stooped for a second to pluck the lance out of the wound,
and then ran on until she found herself safe at home again. There she
bathed and bound up the wound secretly, and told no one how naughty she
had been, for she knew that her father would punish her severely.

Next day, when the king went to visit the jogi, the holy man would
neither speak to nor look at him.

'What is the matter?' asked the king. 'Won't you speak to me to-day?'

'I have nothing to say that you would care to hear,' answered the jogi.

'Why?' said the king. 'Surely you know that I value all that you say,
whatever it may be.'

But still the jogi sat with his face turned away, and the more the king
pressed him the more silent and mysterious he became. At last, after
much persuasion, he said:

'Let me tell you, then, that there is in this city a creature which,
if you do not put an end to it, will kill every single person in the
place.'

The king, who was easily frightened, grew pale.

'What?' he gasped--'what is this dreadful thing? How am I to know it
and to catch it? Only counsel me and help me, and I will do all that you
advise.'

'Ah!' replied the jogi, 'it is indeed dreadful. It is in the shape of a
beautiful girl, but it is really an evil spirit. Last evening it came to
visit me, and when I looked upon it its beauty faded into hideousness,
its teeth became horrible fangs, its eyes glared like coals of fire,
great claws sprang from its slender fingers, and were I not what I am it
might have consumed me.'

The king could hardly speak from alarm, but at last he said:

'How am I to distinguish this awful thing when I see it?'

'Search,' said the jogi, 'for a lovely girl with a lance wound in her
leg, and when she is found secure her safely and come and tell me, and I
will advise you what to do next.'

Away hurried the king, and soon set all his soldiers scouring the
country for a girl with a lance wound in her left. For two days the
search went on, and then it was somehow discovered that the only person
with a lance wound in the leg was the princess herself. The king,
greatly agitated, went off to tell the jogi, and to assure him that
there must be some mistake. But of course the jogi was prepared for
this, and had his answer ready.

'She is not really your daughter, who was stolen away at her birth, but
an evil spirit that has taken her form,' said he solemnly. 'You can do
what you like, but if you don't take my advice she will kill you all.'
And so solemn he appeared, and so unshaken in his confidence, that the
king's wisdom was blinded, and he declared that he would do whatever the
jogi advised, and believe whatever he said. So the jogi directed him to
send him secretly two carpenters; and when they arrived he set them to
make a great chest, so cunningly jointed and put together that neither
air nor water could penetrate it. There and then the chest was made,
and, when it was ready, the jogi bade the king to bring the princess
by night; and they two thrust the poor little maiden into the chest and
fastened it down with long nails, and between them carried it to the
river and pushed it out into the stream.

As soon as the jogi got back from this deed he called two of his pupils,
and pretended that it had been revealed to him that there should be
found floating on the river a chest with something of great price within
it; and he bade them go and watch for it at such a place far down the
stream, and when the chest came slowly along, bobbing and turning in the
tide, they were to seize it and secretly and swiftly bring it to him,
for he was now determined to put the princess to death himself. The
pupils set off at once, wondering at the strangeness of their errand,
and still more at the holiness of the jogi to whom such secrets were
revealed.

It happened that, as the next morning was dawning, the gallant young
prince of Dilaram was hunting by the banks of the river, with a great
following of wazirs, attendants, and huntsmen, and as he rode he saw
floating on the river a large chest, which came slowly along, bobbing
and turning in the tide. Raising himself in his saddle, he gave an
order, and half a dozen men plunged into the water and drew the chest
out on to the river bank, where every one crowded around to see what
it could contain. The prince was certainly not the least curious among
them; but he was a cautious young man, and, as he prepared to open the
chest himself, he bade all but a few stand back, and these few to draw
their swords, so as to be prepared in case the chest should hold some
evil beast, or djinn, or giant. When all were ready and expectant, the
prince with his dagger forced open the lid and flung it back, and there
lay, living and breathing, the most lovely maiden he had ever seen in
his life.

Although she was half stifled from her confinement in the chest, the
princess speedily revived, and, when she was able to sit up, the prince
began to question her as to who she was and how she came to be shut
up in the chest and set afloat upon the water; and she, blushing and
trembling to find herself in the presence of so many strangers, told him
that she was the princess of Rahmatabad, and that she had been put into
the chest by her own father. When he on his part told her that he
was the prince of Dilaram, the astonishment of the young people was
unbounded to find that they, who had been betrothed without ever having
seen one another, should have actually met for the first time in such
strange circumstances. In fact, the prince was so moved by her beauty
and modest ways that he called up his wazirs and demanded to be married
at once to this lovely lady who had so completely won his heart. And
married they were then and there upon the river bank, and went home to
the prince's palace, where, when the story was told, they were welcomed
by the old rajah, the prince's father, and the remainder of the day was
given over to feasting and rejoicing. But when the banquet was over, the
bride told her husband that now, on the threshold of their married
life, she had more to relate of her adventures than he had given her
the opportunity to tell as yet; and then, without hiding anything, she
informed him of all that happened to her from the time she had stolen
out to visit the wicked jogi.

In the morning the prince called his chief wazir and ordered him to shut
up in the chest in which the princess had been found a great monkey that
lived chained up in the palace, and to take the chest back to the river
and set it afloat once more and watch what became of it. So the monkey
was caught and put into the chest, and some of the prince's servants
took it down to the river and pushed it off into the water. Then they
followed secretly a long way off to see what became of it.

Meanwhile the jogi's two pupils watched and watched for the chest until
they were nearly tired of watching, and were beginning to wonder whether
the jogi was right after all, when on the second day they spied the
great chest coming floating on the river, slowly bobbing and turning in
the tide; and instantly a great joy and exultation seized them, for they
thought that here indeed was further proof of the wonderful wisdom of
their master. With some difficulty they secured the chest, and carried
it back as swiftly and secretly as possible to the jogi's house. As soon
as they brought in the chest, the jogi, who had been getting very cross
and impatient, told them to put it down, and to go outside whilst he
opened the magic chest.

'And even if you hear cries and sounds, however alarming, you must on
no account enter,' said the jogi, walking over to a closet where lay the
silken cord that was to strangle the princess.

And the two pupils did as they were told, and went outside and shut
close all the doors. Presently they heard a great outcry within and the
jogi's voice crying aloud for help; but they dared not enter, for had
they not been told that whatever the noise, they must not come in? So
they sat outside, waiting and wondering; and at last all grew still
and quiet, and remained so for such a long time that they determined
to enter and see if all was well. No sooner had they opened the door
leading into the courtyard than they were nearly upset by a huge monkey
that came leaping straight to the doorway and escaped past them into
the open fields. Then they stepped into the room, and there they saw the
jogi's body lying torn to pieces on the threshold of his dwelling!

Very soon the story spread, as stories will, and reached the ears of the
princess and her husband, and when she knew that her enemy was dead she
made her peace with her father.

From Major Campbell, Feroshepore.