The White Doe

[From L'Etude Ethnographique sur les Baronga, par Henri Junod.]


Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who loved each other
dearly, and would have been perfectly happy if they had only had a
little son or daughter to play with. They never talked about it, and
always pretended that there was nothing in the world to wish for; but,
sometimes when they looked at other people's children, their faces grew
sad, and their courtiers and attendants knew the reason why.

One day the queen was sitting alone by the side of a waterfall which
sprung from some rocks in the large park adjoining the castle. She was
feeling more than usually miserable, and had sent away her ladies so
that no one might witness her grief. Suddenly she heard a rustling
movement in the pool below the waterfall, and, on glancing up, she saw a
large crab climbing on to a stone beside her.

'Great queen,' said the crab, 'I am here to tell you that the desire of
your heart will soon be granted. But first you must permit me to lead
you to the palace of the fairies, which, though hard by, has never been
seen by mortal eyes because of the thick clouds that surround it. When
there you will know more; that is, if you will trust yourself to me.'

The queen had never before heard an animal speak, and was struck dumb
with surprise. However, she was so enchanted at the words of the crab
that she smiled sweetly and held out her hand; it was taken, not by the
crab, which had stood there only a moment before, but by a little old
woman smartly dressed in white and crimson with green ribbons in her
grey hair. And, wonderful to say, not a drop of water fell from her
clothes.

The old woman ran lightly down a path along which the queen had been
a hundred times before, but it seemed so different she could hardly
believe it was the same. Instead of having to push her way through
nettles and brambles, roses and jasmine hung about her head, while under
her feet the ground was sweet with violets. The orange trees were so
tall and thick that, even at mid-day, the sun was never too hot, and
at the end of the path was a glimmer of something so dazzling that the
queen had to shade her eyes, and peep at it only between her fingers.

'What can it be?' she asked, turning to her guide; who answered:

'Oh, that is the fairies' palace, and here are some of them coming to
meet us.'

As she spoke the gates swung back and six fairies approached, each
bearing in her hand a flower made of precious stones, but so like a real
one that it was only by touching you could tell the difference.

'Madam,' they said, 'we know not how to thank you for this mark of your
confidence, but have the happiness to tell you that in a short time you
will have a little daughter.'

The queen was so enchanted at this news that she nearly fainted with
joy; but when she was able to speak, she poured out all her gratitude to
the fairies for their promised gift.

'And now,' she said, 'I ought not to stay any longer, for my husband
will think that I have run away, or that some evil beast has devoured
me.'

In a little while it happened just as the fairies had foretold, and a
baby girl was born in the palace. Of course both the king and queen were
delighted, and the child was called Desiree, which means 'desired,' for
she had been 'desired' for five years before her birth.

At first the queen could think of nothing but her new plaything, but
then she remembered the fairies who had sent it to her. Bidding her
ladies bring her the posy of jewelled flowers which had been given her
at the palace, she took each flower in her hand and called it by name,
and, in turn, each fairy appeared before her. But, as unluckily
often happens, the one to whom she owed the most, the crab-fairy, was
forgotten, and by this, as in the case of other babies you have read
about, much mischief was wrought.

However, for the moment all was gaiety in the palace, and everybody
inside ran to the windows to watch the fairies' carriages, for no two
were alike. One had a car of ebony, drawn by white pigeons, another was
lying back in her ivory chariot, driving ten black crows, while the rest
had chosen rare woods or many-coloured sea-shells, with scarlet and
blue macaws, long-tailed peacocks, or green love-birds for horses. These
carriages were only used on occasions of state, for when they went to
war flying dragons, fiery serpents, lions or leopards, took the place of
the beautiful birds.

The fairies entered the queen's chamber followed by little dwarfs who
carried their presents and looked much prouder than their mistresses.
One by one their burdens were spread upon the ground, and no one had
ever seen such lovely things. Everything that a baby could possibly wear
or play with was there, and besides, they had other and more precious
gifts to give her, which only children who have fairies for godmothers
can ever hope to possess.

They were all gathered round the heap of pink cushions on which the baby
lay asleep, when a shadow seemed to fall between them and the sun, while
a cold wind blew through the room. Everybody looked up, and there was
the crab-fairy, who had grown as tall as the ceiling in her anger.

'So I am forgotten!' cried she, in a voice so loud that the queen
trembled as she heard it. 'Who was it soothed you in your trouble? Who
was it led you to the fairies? Who was it brought you back in safety
to your home again? Yet I--I--am overlooked, while these who have done
nothing in comparison, are petted and thanked.'

The queen, almost dumb with terror, in vain tried to think of some
explanation or apology; but there was none, and she could only confess
her fault and implore forgiveness. The fairies also did their best to
soften the wrath of their sister, and knowing that, like many plain
people who are not fairies, she was very vain, they entreated her to
drop her crab's disguise, and to become once more the charming person
they were accustomed to see.

For some time the enraged fairy would listen to nothing; but at length
the flatteries began to take effect. The crab's shell fell from her, she
shrank into her usual size, and lost some of her fierce expression.

'Well,' she said, 'I will not cause the princess's death, as I had meant
to do, but at the same time she will have to bear the punishment of
her mother's fault, as many other children have done before her. The
sentence I pass upon her is, that if she is allowed to see one ray of
daylight before her fifteenth birthday she will rue it bitterly, and it
may perhaps cost her her life.' And with these words she vanished by the
window through which she came, while the fairies comforted the weeping
queen and took counsel how best the princess might be kept safe during
her childhood.

At the end of half an hour they had made up their minds what to do, and
at the command of the fairies, a beautiful palace sprang up, close to
that of the king and queen, but different from every palace in the world
in having no windows, and only a door right under the earth. However,
once within, daylight was hardly missed, so brilliant were the
multitudes of tapers that were burning on the walls.

Now up to this time the princess's history has been like the history of
many a princess that you have read about; but, when the period of her
imprisonment was nearly over, her fortunes took another turn. For almost
fifteen years the fairies had taken care of her, and amused her and
taught her, so that when she came into the world she might be no
whit behind the daughters of other kings in all that makes a princess
charming and accomplished. They all loved her dearly, but the fairy
Tulip loved her most of all; and as the princess's fifteenth birthday
drew near, the fairy began to tremble lest something terrible should
happen--some accident which had not been foreseen. 'Do not let her
out of your sight,' said Tulip to the queen, 'and meanwhile, let her
portrait be painted and carried to the neighbouring Courts, as is the
custom in order that the kings may see how far her beauty exceeds that
of every other princess, and that they may demand her in marriage for
their sons.'

And so it was done; and as the fairy had prophesied, all the young
princes fell in love with the picture; but the last one to whom it was
shown could think of nothing else, and refused to let it be removed from
his chamber, where he spent whole days gazing at it.

The king his father was much surprised at the change which had come over
his son, who generally passed all his time in hunting or hawking, and
his anxiety was increased by a conversation he overheard between two of
his courtiers that they feared the prince must be going out of his mind,
so moody had he become. Without losing a moment the king went to visit
his son, and no sooner had he entered the room than the young man flung
himself at his father's feet.

'You have betrothed me already to a bride I can never love!' cried he;
'but if you will not consent to break off the match, and ask for the
hand of the princess Desiree, I shall die of misery, thankful to be
alive no longer.'

These words much displeased the king, who felt that, in breaking off the
marriage already arranged he would almost certainly be bringing on his
subjects a long and bloody war; so, without answering, he turned away,
hoping that a few days might bring his son to reason. But the prince's
condition grew rapidly so much worse that the king, in despair, promised
to send an embassy at once to Desiree's father.

This news cured the young man in an instant of all his ills; and he
began to plan out every detail of dress and of horses and carriages
which were necessary to make the train of the envoy, whose name was
Becasigue, as splendid as possible. He longed to form part of the
embassy himself, if only in the disguise of a page; but this the king
would not allow, and so the prince had to content himself with searching
the kingdom for everything that was rare and beautiful to send to the
princess. Indeed, he arrived, just as the embassy was starting, with his
portrait, which had been painted in secret by the court painter.

The king and queen wished for nothing better than that their daughter
marry into such a great and powerful family, and received the ambassador
with every sign of welcome. They even wished him to see the princess
Desiree, but this was prevented by the fairy Tulip, who feared some ill
might come of it.

'And be sure you tell him,' added she, 'that the marriage cannot
be celebrated till she is fifteen years old, or else some terrible
misfortune will happen to the child.'

So when Becasigue, surround by his train, made a formal request that
the princess Desiree might be given in marriage to his master's son,
the king replied that he was much honoured, and would gladly give his
consent; but that no one could even see the princess till her fifteenth
birthday, as the spell laid upon her in her cradle by a spiteful fairy,
would not cease to work till that was past. The ambassador was greatly
surprised and disappointed, but he knew too much about fairies to
venture to disobey them, therefore he had to content himself with
presenting the prince's portrait to the queen, who lost no time in
carrying it to the princess. As the girl took it in her hands it
suddenly spoke, as it had been taught to do, and uttered a compliment of
the most delicate and charming sort, which made the princess flush with
pleasure.

'How would you like to have a husband like that?' asked the queen,
laughing.

'As if I knew anything about husbands!' replied Desiree, who had long
ago guessed the business of the ambassador.

'Well, he will be your husband in three months,' answered the queen,
ordering the prince's presents to be brought in. The princess was very
pleased with them, and admired them greatly, but the queen noticed that
all the while her eyes constantly strayed from the softest silks and
most brilliant jewels to the portrait of the prince.

The ambassador, finding that there was no hope of his being allowed to
see the princess, took his leave, and returned to his own court; but
here a new difficulty appeared. The prince, though transported with joy
at the thought that Desiree was indeed to be his bride, was bitterly
disappointed that she had not been allowed to return with Becasigue, as
he had foolishly expected; and never having been taught to deny himself
anything or to control his feelings, he fell as ill as he had done
before. He would eat nothing nor take pleasure in anything, but lay all
day on a heap of cushions, gazing at the picture of the princess.

'If I have to wait three months before I can marry the princess I shall
die!' was all this spoilt boy would say; and at length the king, in
despair, resolved to send a fresh embassy to Desiree's father to implore
him to permit the marriage to be celebrated at once. 'I would have
presented my prayer in person, he added in his letter, 'but my great age
and infirmities do not suffer me to travel; however my envoy has orders
to agree to any arrangement that you may propose.'

On his arrival at the palace Becasigue pleaded his young master's cause
as fervently as the king his father could have done, and entreated that
the princess might be consulted in the matter. The queen hastened to the
marble tower, and told her daughter of the sad state of the prince. Des
 the prince without risking the doom pronounced over her by the wicked
fairy.

'I see!' she exclaimed joyfully at last. 'Let a carriage be built
through which no light can come, and let it be brought into my room. I
will then get into it, and we can travel swiftly during the night and
arrive before dawn at the palace of the prince. Once there, I can remain
in some underground chamber, where no light can come.'

'Ah, how clever you are,' cried the queen, clasping her in her arms. And
she hurried away to tell the king.

'What a wife our prince will have!' said Becasigue bowing low; 'but
I must hasten back with the tidings, and to prepare the underground
chamber for the princess.' And so he took his leave.

In a few days the carriage commanded by the princess was ready. It was
of green velvet, scattered over with large golden thistles, and lined
inside with silver brocade embroidered with pink roses. It had no
windows, of course; but the fairy Tulip, whose counsel had been asked,
had managed to light it up with a soft glow that came no one knew
whither.

It was carried straight up into the great hall of the tower, and the
princess stepped into it, followed by her faithful maid of honour,
Eglantine, and by her lady in waiting Cerisette, who also had fallen
in love with the prince's portrait and was bitterly jealous of her
mistress. The fourth place in the carriage was filled by Cerisette's
mother, who had been sent by the queen to look after the three young
people.

Now the Fairy of the Fountain was the godmother of the princess Nera,
to whom the prince had been betrothed before the picture of Desiree
had made him faithless. She was very angry at the slight put upon her
godchild, and from that moment kept careful watch on the princess. In
this journey she saw her chance, and it was she who, invisible, sat
by Cerisette, and put bad thoughts into the minds of both her and her
mother.

The way to the city where the prince lived ran for the most part through
a thick forest, and every night when there was no moon, and not a single
star could be seen through the trees, the guards who travelled with
the princess opened the carriage to give it an airing. This went on for
several days, till only twelve hours journey lay between them and the
palace. The Cerisette persuaded her mother to cut a great hole in the
side of the carriage with a sharp knife which she herself had brought
for the purpose. In the forest the darkness was so intense that no one
perceived what she had done, but when they left the last trees behind
them, and emerged into the open country, the sun was up, and for the
first time since her babyhood, Desiree found herself in the light of
day.

She looked up in surprise at the dazzling brilliance that streamed
through the hole; then gave a sigh which seemed to come from her heart.
The carriage door swung back, as if by magic, and a white doe sprang
out, and in a moment was lost to sight in the forest. But, quick as she
was, Eglantine, her maid of honour, had time to see where she went, and
jumped from the carriage in pursuit of her, followed at a distance by
the guards.

Cerisette and her mother looked at each other in surprise and joy. They
could hardly believe in their good fortune, for everything had happened
exactly as they wished. The first thing to be done was to conceal the
hole which had been cut, and when this was managed (with the help of the
angry fairy, though they did not know it), Cerisette hastened to take
off her own clothes, and put on those of the princess, placing the crown
of diamonds on her head. She found this heavier than she expected; but
then, she had never been accustomed to wear crowns, which makes all the
difference.

At the gates of the city the carriage was stopped by a guard of honour
sent by the king as an escort to his son's bride. Though Cerisette and
her mother could of course see nothing of what was going on outside,
they heard plainly the shouts of welcome from the crowds along the
streets.

The carriage stopped at length in the vast hall which Becasigue had
prepared for the reception of the princess. The grand chamberlain
and the lord high steward were awaiting her, and when the false bride
stepped into the brilliantly lighted room, they bowed low, and said they
had orders to inform his highness the moment she arrived. The prince,
whom the strict etiquette of the court had prevented from being
present in the underground hall, was burning with impatience in his own
apartments.

'So she had come!' cried he, throwing down the bow he had been
pretending to mend. 'Well, was I not right? Is she not a miracle
of beauty and grace? And has she her equal in the whole world?' The
ministers looked at each other, and made no reply; till at length the
chamberlain, who was the bolder of the two, observed:

'My lord, as to her beauty, you can judge of that for yourself. No doubt
it is as great as you say; but at present it seems to have suffered, as
is natural, from the fatigues of the journey.'

This was certainly not what the prince had expected to hear. Could the
portrait have flattered her? He had known of such things before, and
a cold shiver ran through him; but with an effort he kept silent from
further questioning, and only said:

'Has the king been told that the princess is in the palace?'

'Yes, highness; and he has probably already joined her.'

'Then I will go too,' said the prince.

Weak as he was from his long illness, the prince descended the
staircase, supported by the ministers, and entered the room just in time
to hear his father's loud cry of astonishment and disgust at the sight
of Cerisette.

'There was been treachery at work,' he exclaimed, while the prince
leant, dumb with horror, against the doorpost. But the lady in waiting,
who had been prepared for something of the sort, advanced, holding in
her hand the letters which the king and queen had entrusted to her.

'This is the princess Desiree,' said she, pretending to have heard
nothing, 'and I have the honour to present to you these letters from my
liege lord and lady, together with the casket containing the princess'
jewels.'

The king did not move or answer her; so the prince, leaning on the arm
of Becasigue, approached a little closer to the false princess, hoping
against hope that his eyes had deceived him. But the longer he looked
the more he agreed with his father that there was treason somewhere,
for in no single respect did the portrait resemble the woman before him.
Cerisette was so tall that the dress of the princess did not reach her
ankles, and so thin that her bones showed through the stuff. Besides
that her nose was hooked, and her teeth black and ugly.

In his turn, the prince stood rooted to the spot. At last he spoke, and
his words were addressed to his father, and not to the bride who had
come so far to marry him.

'We have been deceived,' he said, 'and it will cost me my life.' And
he leaned so heavily on the envoy that Becasigue feared he was going to
faint, and hastily laid him on the floor. For some minutes no one could
attend to anybody but the prince; but as soon as he revived the lady in
waiting made herself heard.

'Oh, my lovely princess, why did we ever leave home?' cried she. 'But
the king your father will avenge the insults that have been heaped on
you when we tell him how you have been treated.'

'I will tell him myself,' replied the king in wrath; 'he promised me a
wonder of beauty, he has sent me a skeleton! I am not surprised that he
has kept her for fifteen years hidden away from the eyes of the world.
Take them both away,' he continued, turning to his guards, 'and lodge
them in the state prison. There is something more I have to learn of
this matter.'

His orders were obeyed, and the prince, loudly bewailing his sad fate,
was led back to bed, where for many days he lay in a high fever. At
length he slowly began to gain strength, but his sorrow was still so
great that he could not bear the sight of a strange face, and shuddered
at the notion of taking his proper part in the court ceremonies. Unknown
to the king, or to anybody but Becasigue, he planned that, as soon as he
was able, he would make his escape and pass the rest of his life alone
in some solitary place. It was some weeks before he had regained his
health sufficiently to carry out his design; but finally, one beautiful
starlight night, the two friends stole away, and when the king woke
next morning he found a letter lying by his bed, saying that his son
had gone, he knew not whither. He wept bitter tears at the news, for he
loved the prince dearly; but he felt that perhaps the young man had done
wisely, and he trusted to time and Becasigue's influence to bring the
wanderer home.

And while these things were happening, what had become of the white doe?
Though when she sprang from the carriage she was aware that some unkind
fate had changed her into an animal, yet, till she saw herself in a
stream, she had no idea what it was.

'Is it really, I, Desiree?' she said to herself, weeping. 'What wicked
fairy can have treated me so; and shall I never, never take my own shape
again? My only comfort that, in this great forest, full of lions and
serpents, my life will be a short one.'

Now the fairy Tulip was as much grieved at the sad fate of the princess
as Desiree's own mother could have been if she had known of it. Still,
she could not help feeling that if the king and queen had listened to
her advice the girl would by this time be safely in the walls of her new
home. However, she loved Desiree too much to let her suffer more than
could be helped, and it was she who guided Eglantine to the place where
the white doe was standing, cropping the grass which was her dinner.

At the sound of footsteps the pretty creature lifted her head, and when
she saw her faithful companion approaching she bounded towards her,
and rubbed her head on Eglantine's shoulder. The maid of honour was
surprised; but she was fond of animals, and stroked the white doe
tenderly, speaking gently to her all the while. Suddenly the beautiful
creature lifted her head, and looked up into Eglantine's face, with
tears streaming from her eyes. A thought flashed through her mind, and
quick as lightning the girl flung herself on her knees, and lifting the
animal's feet kissed them one by one. 'My princess! O my dear princess!'
cried she; and again the white doe rubbed her head against her, for
thought the spiteful fairy had taken away her power of speech, she had
not deprived her of her reason!

All day long the two remained together, and when Eglantine grew hungry
she was led by the white doe to a part of the forest where pears and
peaches grew in abundance; but, as night came on, the maid of honour
was filled with the terrors of wild beasts which had beset the princess
during her first night in the forest.

'Is there no hut or cave we could go into?' asked she. But the doe only
shook her head; and the two sat down and wept with fright.

The fairy Tulip, who, in spite of her anger, was very soft-hearted, was
touched at their distress, and flew quickly to their help.

'I cannot take away the spell altogether,' she said, 'for the Fairy
of the Fountain is stronger than I; but I can shorten the time of your
punishment, and am able to make it less hard, for as soon as darkness
fall you shall resume your own shape.'

To think that by-and-by she would cease to be a white doe--indeed, that
she would at once cease to be one during the night--was for the present
joy enough for Desiree, and she skipped about on the grass in the
prettiest manner.

'Go straight down the path in front of you,' continued the fairy,
smiling as she watched her; 'go straight down the path and you will soon
reach a little hut where you will find shelter.' And with these words
she vanished, leaving her hearers happier than they ever thought they
could be again.

An old woman was standing at the door of the hut when Eglantine drew
near, with the white doe trotting by her side.

'Good evening!' she said; 'could you give me a night's lodging for
myself and my doe?'

'Certainly I can,' replied the old woman. And she led them into a room
with two little white beds, so clean and comfortable that it made you
sleepy even to look at them.

The door had hardly closed behind the old woman when the sun sank below
the horizon, and Desiree became a girl again.

'Oh, Eglantine! what should I have done if you had not followed me,' she
cried. And she flung herself into her friend's arms in a transport of
delight.

Early in the morning Eglantine was awakened by the sound of someone
scratching at the door, and on opening her eyes she saw the white doe
struggling to get out. The little creature looked up and into her face,
and nodded her head as the maid of honour unfastened the latch, but
bounded away into the woods, and was lost to sight in a moment.

 Meanwhile, the prince and Becasigue were wandering through the wood,
till at last the prince grew so tired, that he lay down under a tree,
and told Becasigue that he had better go in search of food, and of some
place where they could sleep. Becasigue had not gone very far, when a
turn of the path brought him face to face with the old woman who was
feeding her doves before her cottage.

'Could you give me some milk and fruit?' asked he. 'I am very hungry
myself, and, besides, I have left a friend behind me who is still weak
from illness.'

'Certainly I can,' answered the old woman. 'But come and sit down in my
kitchen while I catch the goat and milk it.'

Becasigue was glad enough to do as he was bid, and in a few minutes the
old woman returned with a basket brimming over with oranges and grapes.

'If your friend has been ill he should not pass the night in the
forest,' said she. 'I have room in my hut--tiny enough, it is true; but
better than nothing, and to that you are both heartily welcome.'

Becasigue thanked her warmly, and as by this time it was almost
sunset, he set out to fetch the prince. It was while he was absent that
Eglantine and the white doe entered the hut, and having, of course, no
idea that in the very next room was the man whose childish impatience
had been the cause of all their troubles.

In spite of his fatigue, the prince slept badly, and directly it was
light he rose, and bidding Becasigue remain where he was, as he wished
to be alone, he strolled out into the forest. He walked on slowly, just
as his fancy led him, till, suddenly, he came to a wide open space,
and in the middle was the white doe quietly eating her breakfast. She
bounded off at the sight of a man, but not before the prince, who had
fastened on his bow without thinking, had let fly several arrows, which
the fairy Tulip took care should do her no harm. But, quickly as she
ran, she soon felt her strength failing her, for fifteen years of life
in a tower had not taught her how to exercise her limbs.

Luckily, the prince was too weak to follow her far, and a turn of a path
brought her close to the hut, where Eglantine was awaiting her. Panting
for breath, she entered their room, and flung herself down on the floor.

When it was dark again, and she was once more the princess Desiree, she
told Eglantine what had befallen her.

'I feared the Fairy of the Fountain, and the cruel beasts,' said she;
'but somehow I never thought of the dangers that I ran from men. I do
not know now what saved me.'

'You must stay quietly here till the time of your punishment is over,'
answered Eglantine. But when the morning dawned, and the girl turned
into a doe, the longing for the forest came over her, and she sprang
away as before.

As soon as the prince was awake he hastened to the place where, only the
day before, he had found the white doe feeding; but of course she had
taken care to go in the opposite direction. Much disappointed, he
tried first one green path and then another, and at last, wearied with
walking, he threw himself down and went fast asleep.

Just at this moment the white doe sprang out of a thicket near by,
and started back trembling when she beheld her enemy lying there. Yet,
instead of turning to fly, something bade her go and look at him unseen.
As she gazed a thrill ran through her, for she felt that, worn and
wasted though he was by illness, it was the face of her destined
husband. Gently stooping over him she kissed his forehead, and at her
touch he awoke.

For a minute they looked at each other, and to his amazement he
recognized the white doe which had escaped him the previous day. But in
an instant the animal was aroused to a sense of her danger, and she fled
with all her strength into the thickest part of the forest. Quick as
lightning the prince was on her track, but this time it was with no wish
to kill or even wound the beautiful creature.

'Pretty doe! pretty doe! stop! I won't hurt you,' cried he, but his
words were carried away by the wind.

At length the doe could run no more, and when the prince reached her,
she was lying stretched out on the grass, waiting for her death blow.
But instead the prince knelt at her side, and stroked her, and bade her
fear nothing, as he would take care of her. So he fetched a little water
from the stream in his horn hunting cup, then, cutting some branches
from the trees, he twisted them into a litter which he covered with
moss, and laid the white doe gently on it.

For a long time they remained thus, but when Desiree saw by the way that
the light struck the trees, that he sun must be near its setting, she
was filled with alarm lest the darkness should fall, and the prince
should behold her in her human shape.

'No, he must not see me for the first time here,' she thought, and
instantly began to plan how to get rid of him. Then she opened her mouth
and let her tongue hang out, as if she were dying of thirst, and the
prince, as she expected, hastened to the stream to get her some more
water.

When he returned, the white doe was gone.

That night Desiree confessed to Eglantine that her pursuer was no other
than the prince, and that far from flattering him, the portrait had
never done him justice.

'Is it not hard to meet him in this shape,' wept she, 'when we both love
each other so much?' But Eglantine comforted her, and reminded her that
in a short time all would be well.

The prince was very angry at the flight of the white doe, for whom he
had taken so much trouble, and returning to the cottage he poured out
his adventures and his wrath to Becasigue, who could not help smiling.

'She shall not escape me again,' cried the prince. 'If I hunt her every
day for a year, I will have her at last.' And in this frame of mind he
went to bed.

 When the white doe entered the forest next morning, she had not made
up her mind whether she would go and meet the prince, or whether she
would shun him, and hide in thickets of which he knew nothing. She
decided that the last plan was the best; and so it would have been if
the prince had not taken the very same direction in search of her.

Quite by accident he caught sight of her white skin shining through the
bushes, and at the same instant she heard a twig snap under his feet.
In a moment she was up and away, but the prince, not knowing how else to
capture her, aimed an arrow at her leg, which brought her to the ground.

The young man felt like a murderer as he ran hastily up to where the
white doe lay, and did his best to soothe the pain she felt, which, in
reality, was the last part of the punishment sent by the Fairy of the
Fountain. First he brought her some water, and then he fetched some
healing herbs, and having crushed them in his hand, laid them on the
wound.

'Ah! what a wretch I was to have hurt you,' cried he, resting her head
upon his knees; 'and now you will hate me and fly from me for ever!'

For some time the doe lay quietly where she was, but, as before, she
remembered that the hour of her transformation was near. She struggled
to her feet, but the prince would not hear of her walking, and thinking
the old woman might be able to dress her wound better than he could,
he took her in his arms to carry her back to the hut. But, small as she
was, she made herself so heavy that, after staggering a few steps under
her weight, he laid her down, and tied her fast to a tree with some of
the ribbons of his hat. This done he went away to get help.

Meanwhile Eglantine had grown very uneasy at the long absence of her
mistress, and had come out to look for her. Just as the prince passed
out of sight the fluttering ribbons dance before her eyes, and she
descried her beautiful princess bound to a tree. With all her might she
worked at the knots, but not a single one could she undo, though all
appeared so easy. She was still busy with them when a voice behind her
said:

'Pardon me, fair lady, but it is MY doe you are trying to steal!'

'Excuse me, good knight' answered Eglantine, hardly glancing at him,
'but it is MY doe that is tied up here! And if you wish for a proof of
it, you can see if she knows me or not. Touch my heart, my little
one,' she continued, dropping on her knees. And the doe lifted up its
fore-foot and laid it on her side. 'Now put your arms round my neck, and
sigh.' And again the doe did as she was bid.

'You are right,' said the prince; 'but it is with sorrow I give her up
to you, for though I have wounded her yet I love her deeply.'

To this Eglantine answered nothing; but carefully raising up the doe,
she led her slowly to the hut.

Now both the prince and Becasigue were quite unaware that the old
woman had any guests besides themselves, and, following afar, were much
surprised to behold Eglantine and her charge enter the cottage. They
lost no time in questioning the old woman, who replied that she knew
nothing about the lady and her white doe, who slept next the chamber
occupied by the prince and his friend, but that they were very quiet,
and paid her well. Then she went back to her kitchen.

'Do you know,' said Becasigue, when they were alone, 'I am certain that
the lady we saw is the maid of honour to the Princess Desiree, whom I
met at the palace. And, as her room is next to this, it will be easy to
make a small hole through which I can satisfy myself whether I am right
or not.'

So, taking a knife out of his pocket, he began to saw away the woodwork.
The girls heard the grating noise, but fancying it was a mouse, paid no
attention, and Becasigue was left in peace to pursue his work. At length
the hole was large enough for him to peep through, and the sight was one
to strike him dumb with amazement. He had guessed truly: the tall lady
was Eglantine herself; but the other--where had he seen her? Ah! now he
knew--it was the lady of the portrait!

Desiree, in a flowing dress of green silk, was lying stretched out upon
cushions, and as Eglantine bent over her to bathe the wounded leg, she
began to talk:

'Oh! let me die,' cried she, 'rather than go on leading this life. You
cannot tell the misery of being a beast all the day, and unable to speak
to the man I love, to whose impatience I owe my cruel fate. Yet, even
so, I cannot bring myself to hate him.'

These words, low though they were spoken, reached Becasigue, who could
hardly believe his ears. He stood silent for a moment; then, crossing to
the window out of which the prince was gazing, he took his arm and led
him across the room. A single glance was sufficient to show the prince
that it was indeed Desiree; and how another had come to the palace
bearing her name, at that instant he neither knew nor cared. Stealing on
tip-toe from the room, he knocked at the next door, which was opened by
Eglantine, who thought it was the old woman bearing their supper.

She started back at the sight of the prince, whom this time she also
recognised. But he thrust her aside, and flung himself at the feet of
Desiree, to whom he poured out all his heart!

Dawn found them still conversing; and the sun was high in the heavens
before the princess perceived that she retained her human form. Ah! how
happy she was when she knew that the days of her punishment were over;
and with a glad voice she told the prince the tale of her enchantment.

So the story ended well after all; and the fairy Tulip, who turned out
to be the old woman of the hut, made the young couple such a wedding
feast as had never been seen since the world began. And everybody was
delighted, except Cerisette and her mother, who were put in a boat and
carried to a small island, where they had to work hard for their living.