The Rover of the Plain

[From Contes Populaires Slaves, par Louis Leger.]


A long way off, near the sea coast of the east of Africa, there dwelt,
once upon a time, a man and his wife. They had two children, a son and
a daughter, whom they loved very much, and, like parents in other
countries, they often talked of the fine marriages the young people
would make some day. Out there both boys and girls marry early, and very
soon, it seemed to the mother, a message was sent by a rich man on the
other side of the great hills offering a fat herd of oxen in exchange
for the girl. Everyone in the house and in the village rejoiced, and
the maiden was despatched to her new home. When all was quiet again the
father said to his son:

'Now that we own such a splendid troop of oxen you had better hasten and
get yourself a wife, lest some illness should overtake them. Already we
have seen in the villages round about one or two damsels whose parents
would gladly part with them for less than half the herd. Therefore tell
us which you like best, and we will buy her for you.'

But the son answered:

'Not so; the maidens I have seen do not please me. If, indeed, I must
marry, let me travel and find a wife for myself.'

'It shall be as you wish,' said the parents; 'but if by-and-by trouble
should come of it, it will be your fault and not ours.'

The youth, however, would not listen; and bidding his father and
mother farewell, set out on his search. Far, far away he wandered, over
mountains and across rivers, till he reached a village where the people
were quite different from those of his own race. He glanced about him
and noticed that the girls were fair to look upon, as they pounded maize
or stewed something that smelt very nice in earthen pots--especially
if you were hot and tired; and when one of the maidens turned round and
offered the stranger some dinner, he made up his mind that he would wed
her and nobody else.

So he sent a message to her parents asking their leave to take her for
his wife, and they came next day to bring their answer.

'We will give you our daughter,' said they, 'if you can pay a good price
for her. Never was there so hardworking a girl; and how we shall do
without her we cannot tell! Still--no doubt your father and mother will
come themselves and bring the price?'

'No; I have the price with me,' replied the young man; laying down a
handful of gold pieces. 'Here it is--take it.'

The old couple's eyes glittered greedily; but custom forbade them to
touch the price before all was arranged.

'At least,' said they, after a moment's pause, 'we may expect them to
fetch your wife to her new home?'

'No; they are not used to travelling,' answered the bridegroom. 'Let the
ceremony be performed without delay, and we will set forth at once. It
is a long journey.'

Then the parents called in the girl, who was lying in the sun outside
the hut, and, in the presence of all the village, a goat was killed, the
sacred dance took place, and a blessing was said over the heads of the
young people. After that the bride was led aside by her father, whose
duty it was to bestow on her some parting advice as to her conduct in
her married life.

'Be good to your husband's parents,' added he, 'and always do the will
of your husband.' And the girl nodded her head obediently. Next it was
the mother's turn; and, as was the custom of the tribe, she spoke to her
daughter:

'Will you choose which of your sisters shall go with you to cut your
wood and carry your water?'

'I do not want any of them,' answered she; 'they are no use. They will
drop the wood and spill the water.'

'Then will you have any of the other children? There are enough to
spare,' asked the mother again. But the bride said quickly:

'I will have none of them! You must give me our buffalo, the Rover of
the Plain; he alone shall serve me.'

'What folly you talk!' cried the parents. 'Give you our buffalo, the
Rover of the Plain? Why, you know that our life depends on him. Here
he is well fed and lies on soft grass; but how can you tell what will
befall him in another country? The food may be bad, he will die of
hunger; and, if he dies we die also.'

'No, no,' said the bride; 'I can look after him as well as you. Get him
ready, for the sun is sinking and it is time we set forth.'

So she went away and put together a small pot filled with healing herms,
a horn that she used in tending sick people, a little knife, and a
calabash containing deer fat; and, hiding these about her, she took
leave of her father and mother and started across the mountains by the
side of her husband.

But the young man did not see the buffalo that followed them, which had
left his home to be the servant of his wife.

No one ever knew how the news spread to the kraal that the young man was
coming back, bringing a wife with him; but, somehow or other, when the
two entered the village, every man and woman was standing in the road
uttering shouts of welcome.

'Ah, you are not dead after all,' cried they; 'and have found a wife to
your liking, though you would have none of our girls. Well, well,
you have chosen your own path; and if ill comes of it beware lest you
grumble.'

Next day the husband took his wife to the fields and showed her which
were his, and which belonged to his mother. The girl listened carefully
to all he told her, and walked with him back to the hut; but close to
the door she stopped, and said:

'I have dropped my necklace of beads in the field, and I must go and
look for it.' But in truth she had done nothing of the sort, and it was
only an excuse to go and seek the buffalo.

The beast was crouching under a tree when she came up, and snorted with
pleasure at the sight of her.

'You can roam about this field, and this, and this,' she said, 'for they
belong to my husband; and that is his wood, where you may hide yourself.
But the other fields are his mother's, so beware lest you touch them.'

'I will beware,' answered the buffalo; and, patting his head, the girl
left him.

Oh, how much better a servant he was than any of the little girls the
bride had refused to bring with her! If she wanted water, she had only
to cross the patch of maize behind the hut and seek out the place where
the buffalo lay hidden, and put down her pail beside him. Then she would
sit at her ease while he went to the lake and brought the bucket back
brimming over. If she wanted wood, he would break the branches off the
trees and lay them at her feet. And the villagers watched her return
laden, and said to each other:

'Surely the girls of her country are stronger than our girls, for none
of them could cut so quickly or carry so much!' But then, nobody knew
that she had a buffalo for a servant.

Only, all this time she never gave the poor buffalo anything to eat,
because she had just one dish, out of which she and her husband ate;
while in her old home there was a dish put aside expressly for the Rover
of the Plain. The buffalo bore it as long as he could; but, one day,
when his mistress bade him go to the lake and fetch water, his knees
almost gave way from hunger. He kept silence, however, till the evening,
when he said to his mistress:

'I am nearly starved; I have not touched food since I came here. I can
work no more.'

'Alas!' answered she, 'what can I do? I have only one dish in the house.
You will have to steal some beans from the fields. Take a few here and a
few there; but be sure not to take too many from one place, or the owner
may notice it.'

Now the buffalo had always lived an honest life, but if his mistress did
not feed him, he must get food for himself. So that night, when all the
village was asleep, he came out from the wood and ate a few beans here
and a few there, as his mistress had bidden him. And when at last his
hunger was satisfied, he crept back to his lair. But a buffalo is not
a fairy, and the next morning, when the women arrived to work in the
fields, they stood still with astonishment, and said to each other:

'Just look at this; a savage beast has been destroying our crops, and we
can see the traces of his feet!' And they hurried to their homes to tell
their tale.

In the evening the girl crept out to the buffalo's hiding-place, and
said to him:

'They perceived what happened, of course; so to-night you had better
seek your supper further off.' And the buffalo nodded his head and
followed her counsel; but in the morning, when these women also went out
to work, the races of hoofs were plainly to be seen, and they hastened
to tell their husbands, and begged them to bring their guns, and to
watch for the robber.

It happened that the stranger girl's husband was the best marksman
in all the village, and he hid himself behind the trunk of a tree and
waited.

The buffalo, thinking that they would probably make a search for him in
the fields he had laid waste the evening before, returned to the bean
patch belonging to his mistress.

The young man saw him coming with amazement.

'Why, it is a buffalo!' cried he; 'I never have beheld one in this
country before!' And raising his gun, he aimed just behind the ear.

The buffalo gave a leap into the air, and then fell dead.

'It was a good shot,' said the young man. And he ran to the village to
tell them that the thief was punished.

When he entered his hut he found his wife, who had somehow heard the
news, twisting herself to and fro and shedding tears.

'Are you ill?' asked he. And she answered: 'Yes; I have pains all over
my body.' But she was not ill at all, only very unhappy at the death of
the buffalo which had served her so well. Her husband felt anxious, and
sent for the medicine man; but though she pretended to listen to him,
she threw all his medicine out of the door directly he had gone away.

With the first rays of light the whole village was awake, and the women
set forth armed with baskets and the men with knives in order to cut up
the buffalo. Only the girl remained in her hut; and after a while she
too went to join them, groaning and weeping as she walked along.

'What are you doing here?' asked her husband when he saw her. 'If you
are ill you are better at home.'

'Oh! I could not stay alone in the village,' said she. And her
mother-in-law left off her work to come and scold her, and to tell her
that she would kill herself if she did such foolish things. But the girl
would not listen and sat down and looked on.

When they had divided the buffalo's flesh, and each woman had the family
portion in her basket, the stranger wife got up and said:

'Let me have the head.'

'You could never carry anything so heavy,' answered the men, 'and now
you are ill besides.'

'You do not know how strong I am,' answered she. And at last they gave
it her.

She did not walk to the village with the others, but lingered behind,
and, instead of entering her hut, she slipped into the little shed where
the pots for cooking and storing maize were kept. Then she laid down
the buffalo's head and sat beside it. Her husband came to seek her, and
begged her to leave the shed and go to bed, as she must be tired out;
but the girl would not stir, neither would she attend to the words of
her mother-in-law.

'I wish you would leave me alone!' she answered crossly. 'It is
impossible to sleep if somebody is always coming in.' And she turned her
back on them, and would not even eat the food they had brought. So they
went away, and the young man soon stretched himself out on his mat;
but his wife's odd conduct made him anxious, and he lay wake all night,
listening.

When all was still the girl made a fire and boiled some water in a
pot. As soon as it was quite hot she shook in the medicine that she
had brought from home, and then, taking the buffalo's head, she made
incisions with her little knife behind the ear, and close to the temple
where the shot had struck him. Next she applied the horn to the spot and
blew with all her force till, at length, the blood began to move. After
that she spread some of the deer fat out of the calabash over the wound,
which she held in the steam of the hot water. Last of all, she sang in a
low voice a dirge over the Rover of the Plain.

As she chanted the final words the head moved, and the limbs came back.
The buffalo began to feel alive again and shook his horns, and stood
up and stretched himself. Unluckily it was just at this moment that the
husband said to himself:

'I wonder if she is crying still, and what is the matter with her!
Perhaps I had better go and see.' And he got up and, calling her by
name, went out to the shed.

'Go away! I don't want you!' she cried angrily. But it was too late. The
buffalo had fallen to the ground, dead, and with the wound in his head
as before.

The young man who, unlike most of his tribe, was afraid of his wife,
returned to his bed without having seen anything, but wondering very
much what she could be doing all this time. After waiting a few minutes,
she began her task over again, and at the end the buffalo stood on his
feet as before. But just as the girl was rejoicing that her work was
completed, in came the husband once more to see what his wife was doing;
and this time he sat himself down in the hut, and said that he wished to
watch whatever was going on. Then the girl took up the pitcher and all
her other things and left the shed, trying for the third time to bring
the buffalo back to life.

She was too late; the dawn was already breaking, and the head fell to
the ground, dead and corrupt as it was before.

The girl entered the hut, where her husband and his mother were getting
ready to go out.

'I want to go down to the lake, and bathe,' said she.

'But you could never walk so far,' answered they. 'You are so tired, as
it is, that you can hardly stand!'

However, in spite of their warnings, the girl left the hut in the
direction of the lake. Very soon she came back weeping, and sobbed out:

'I met some one in the village who lives in my country, and he told me
that my mother is very, very ill, and if I do not go to her at once she
will be dead before I arrive. I will return as soon as I can, and now
farewell.' And she set forth in the direction of the mountains. But this
story was not true; she knew nothing about her mother, only she wanted
an excuse to go home and tell her family that their prophecies had come
true, and that the buffalo was dead.

 Balancing her basket on her head, she walked along, and directly she
had left the village behind her she broke out into the song of the Rover
of the Plain, and at last, at the end of the day, she came to the group
of huts where her parents lived. Her friends all ran to meet her, and,
weeping, she told them that the buffalo was dead.

This sad news spread like lightning through the country, and the people
flocked from far and near to bewail the loss of the beast who had been
their pride.

'If you had only listened to us,' they cried, 'he would be alive now.
But you refused all the little girls we offered you, and would have
nothing but the buffalo. And remember what the medicine-man said: "If
the buffalo dies you die also!"'

So they bewailed their fate, one to the other, and for a while they did
not perceive that the girl's husband was sitting in their midst, leaning
his gun against a tree. Then one man, turning, beheld him, and bowed
mockingly.

'Hail, murderer! hail! you have slain us all!'

The young man stared, not knowing what he meant, and answered,
wonderingly:

'I shot a buffalo; is that why you call me a murderer?'

'A buffalo--yes; but the servant of your wife! It was he who carried the
wood and drew the water. Did you not know it?'

'No; I did not know it,' replied the husband in surprise. 'Why did no
one tell me? Of course I should not have shot him!'

'Well, he is dead,' answered they, 'and we must die too.'

At this the girl took a cup in which some poisonous herbs had been
crushed, and holding it in her hands, she wailed: 'O my father, Rover of
the Plain!' Then drinking a deep draught from it, fell back dead. One
by one her parents, her brothers and her sisters, drank also and died,
singing a dirge to the memory of the buffalo.

The girl's husband looked on with horror; and returned sadly home across
the mountains, and, entering his hut, threw himself on the ground. At
first he was too tired to speak; but at length he raised his head and
told all the story to his father and mother, who sat watching him. When
he had finished they shook their heads and said:

'Now you see that we spoke no idle words when we told you that ill would
come of your marriage! We offered you a good and hard-working wife, and
you would have none of her. And it is not only your wife you have lost,
but your fortune also. For who will give you back your money if they are
all dead?'

'It is true, O my father,' answered the young man. But in his heart he
thought more of the loss of his wife than of the money he had given for
her.