_JACKAL OR TIGER?_


One hot night, in Hindustan, a king and queen lay awake in the palace
in the midst of the city. Every now and then a faint air blew through
the lattice, and they hoped they were going to sleep, but they never
did. Presently they became more broad awake than ever at the sound of
a howl outside the palace.

'Listen to that tiger!' remarked the king.

'Tiger?' replied the queen. 'How should there be a tiger inside the
city? It was only a jackal.'

'I tell you it was a tiger,' said the king.

'And I tell you that you were dreaming if you thought it was anything
but a jackal,' answered the queen.

'I say it was a tiger,' cried the king; 'don't contradict me.'

'Nonsense!' snapped the queen. 'It was a jackal.' And the dispute
waxed so warm that the king said at last:

'Very well, we'll call the guard and ask; and if it was a jackal I'll
leave this kingdom to you and go away; and if it was a tiger then you
shall go, and I will marry a new wife.'

'As you like,' answered the queen, 'there isn't any doubt which it
was.'

So the king called the two soldiers who were on guard outside and put
the question to them. But, whilst the dispute was going on, the king
and queen had got so excited and talked so loud that the guards had
heard nearly all they said, and one man observed to the other:

'Mind you declare that the king is right. It certainly was a jackal,
but, if we say so, the king will probably not keep his word about
going away, and we shall get into trouble, so we had better take his
side.'

To this the other agreed; therefore, when the king asked them what
animal they had seen, both the guards said it was certainly a tiger,
and that the king was right of course, as he always was. The king made
no remark, but sent for a palanquin, and ordered the queen to be
placed in it, bidding the four bearers of the palanquin to take her a
long way off into the forest and there leave her. In spite of her
tears, she was forced to obey, and away the bearers went for three
days and three nights until they came to a dense wood. There they set
down the palanquin with the queen in it, and started home again.

Now the queen thought to herself that the king could not mean to send
her away for good, and that as soon as he had got over his fit of
temper he would summon her back; so she stayed quite still for a long
time, listening with all her ears for approaching footsteps, but heard
none. After a while she grew nervous, for she was all alone, and put
her head out of the palanquin and looked about her. Day was just
breaking, and birds and insects were beginning to stir; the leaves
rustled in a warm breeze; but, although the queen's eyes wandered in
all directions, there was no sign of any human being. Then her spirit
gave way, and she began to cry.

It so happened that close to the spot where the queen's palanquin had
been set down, there dwelt a man who had a tiny farm in the midst of
the forest, where he and his wife lived alone far from any neighbours.
As it was hot weather the farmer had been sleeping on the flat roof of
his house, but was awakened by the sound of weeping. He jumped up and
ran downstairs as fast as he could, and into the forest towards the
place the sound came from, and there he found the palanquin.

'Oh, poor soul that weeps,' cried the farmer, standing a little way
off, 'who are you?' At this salutation from a stranger the queen grew
silent, dreading she knew not what.

  [Illustration: THE FARMER FINDS THE QUEEN WEEPING BY THE PALANQUIN]

'Oh, you that weep,' repeated the farmer, 'fear not to speak to me,
for you are to me as a daughter. Tell me, who are you?'

His voice was so kind that the queen gathered up her courage and
spoke. And when she had told her story, the farmer called his wife,
who led her to their house, and gave her food to eat, and a bed to lie
on. And in the farm, a few days later, a little prince was born, and
by his mother's wish named Ameer Ali.

Years passed without a sign from the king. His wife might have been
dead for all he seemed to care, though the queen still lived with the
farmer, and the little prince had by this time grown up into a strong,
handsome, and healthy youth. Out in the forest they seemed far from
the world; very few ever came near them, and the prince was
continually begging his mother and the farmer to be allowed to go away
and seek adventures and to make his own living. But she and the wise
farmer always counselled him to wait, until, at last, when he was
eighteen years of age, they had not the heart to forbid him any
longer. So he started off one early morning, with a sword by his side,
a big brass pot to hold water, a few pieces of silver, and a galail[2]
or two-stringed bow in his hand, with which to shoot birds as he
travelled.

Many a weary mile he tramped day after day, until, one morning, he saw
before him just such a forest as that in which he had been born and
bred, and he stepped joyfully into it, like one who goes to meet an
old friend. Presently, as he made his way through a thicket, he saw a
pigeon which he thought would make a good dinner, so he fired a pellet
at it from his galail, but missed the pigeon which fluttered away with
a startled clatter. At the same instant he heard a great clamour from
beyond the thicket, and, on reaching the spot, he found an ugly old
woman streaming wet and crying loudly as she lifted from her head an
earthen vessel with a hole in it from which the water was pouring.
When she saw the prince with his galail in his hand, she called out:

'Oh, wretched one! why must you choose an old woman like me to play
your pranks upon? Where am I to get a fresh pitcher instead of this
one that you have broken with your foolish tricks? And how am I to go
so far for water twice when one journey wearies me?'

  [Illustration: THE UNLUCKY SHOT]

'But, mother,' replied the prince, 'I played no trick upon you! I did
but shoot at a pigeon that should have served me for dinner, and as my
pellet missed it, it must have broken your pitcher. But, in exchange,
you shall have my brass pot, and that will not break easily; and as
for getting water, tell me where to find it, and I'll fetch it while
you dry your garments in the sun, and carry it whither you will.'

At this the old woman's face brightened. She showed him where to seek
the water, and when he returned a few minutes later with his pot
filled to the brim, she led the way without a word, and he followed.
In a short while they came to a hut in the forest, and as they drew
near it Ameer Ali beheld in the doorway the loveliest damsel his eyes
had ever looked on. At the sight of a stranger she drew her veil about
her and stepped into the hut, and much as he wished to see her again
Ameer Ali could think of no excuse by which to bring her back, and so,
with a heavy heart, he made his salutation, and bade the old woman
farewell. But when he had gone a little way she called after him:

'If ever you are in trouble or danger, come to where you now stand and
cry: "Fairy of the Forest! Fairy of the forest, help me now!" And I
will listen to you.'

The prince thanked her and continued his journey, but he thought
little of the old woman's saying, and much of the lovely damsel.
Shortly afterwards he arrived at a city; and, as he was now in great
straits, having come to the end of his money, he walked straight to
the palace of the king and asked for employment. The king said he had
plenty of servants and wanted no more; but the young man pleaded so
hard that at last the rajah was sorry for him, and promised that he
should enter his bodyguard on the condition that he would undertake
any service which was especially difficult or dangerous. This was just
what Ameer Ali wanted, and he agreed to do whatever the king might
wish.

Soon after this, on a dark and stormy night, when the river roared
beneath the palace walls, the sound of a woman weeping and wailing was
heard above the storm. The king ordered a servant to go and see what
was the matter; but the servant, falling on his knees in terror,
begged that he might not be sent on such an errand, particularly on a
night so wild, when evil spirits and witches were sure to be abroad.
Indeed, so frightened was he, that the king, who was very
kind-hearted, bade another to go in his stead, but each one showed the
same strange fear. Then Ameer Ali stepped forward:

'This is my duty, your majesty,' he said, 'I will go.'

The king nodded, and off he went. The night was as dark as pitch, and
the wind blew furiously and drove the rain in sheets into his face;
but he made his way down to the ford under the palace walls and
stepped into the flooded water. Inch by inch, and foot by foot he
fought his way across, now nearly swept off his feet by some sudden
swirl or eddy, now narrowly escaping being caught in the branches of
some floating tree that came tossing and swinging down the stream. At
length he emerged, panting and dripping wet, on the other side. Close
by the bank stood a gallows, and on the gallows hung the body of some
evildoer, whilst from the foot of it came the sound of sobbing that
the king had heard.

Ameer Ali was so grieved for the one who wept there that he thought
nothing of the wildness of the night or of the roaring river. As for
ghosts and witches, they had never troubled him, so he walked up
towards the gallows where crouched the figure of the woman.

'What ails you?' he said.

Now the woman was not really a woman at all, but a horrid kind of
witch who really lived in Witchland, and had no business on earth. If
ever a man strayed into Witchland the ogresses used to eat him up, and
this old witch thought she would like to catch a man for supper, and
that is why she had been sobbing and crying in hopes that someone out
of pity might come to her rescue.

So when Ameer Ali questioned her, she replied:

'Ah, kind sir, it is my poor son who hangs upon that gallows; help me
to get him down and I will bless you for ever.'

Ameer Ali thought that her voice sounded rather eager than sorrowful,
and he suspected that she was not telling the truth, so he determined
to be very cautious.

  [Illustration: AMEER ALI WINS THE ANKLET]

'That will be rather difficult,' he said, 'for the gallows is high,
and we have no ladder.'

'Ah, but if you will just stoop down and let me climb upon your
shoulders,' answered the old witch, 'I think I could reach him.' And
her voice now sounded so cruel that Ameer Ali was sure that she
intended some evil. But he only said:

'Very well, we will try.' With that he drew his sword, pretending that
he needed it to lean upon, and bent so that the old woman could
clamber on to his back, which she did very nimbly. Then, suddenly, he
felt a noose slipped over his neck, and the old witch sprang from his
shoulders on to the gallows, crying:

'Now, foolish one, I have got you, and will kill you for my supper.'

But Ameer Ali gave a sweep upwards with his sharp sword to cut the
rope that she had slipped round his neck, and not only cut the cord
but cut also the old woman's foot as it dangled above him; and with a
yell of pain and anger she vanished into the darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ameer Ali then sat down to collect himself a little, and felt upon the
ground by his side an anklet that had evidently fallen off the old
witch's foot. This he put into his pocket, and as the storm had by
this time passed over he made his way back to the palace. When he had
finished his story, he took the anklet out of his pocket and handed it
to the king, who, like everyone else, was amazed at the glory of the
jewels which composed it. Indeed, Ameer Ali himself was astonished,
for he had slipped the anklet into his pocket in the dark and had not
looked at it since. The king was delighted at its beauty, and having
praised and rewarded Ameer Ali, he gave the anklet to his daughter, a
proud and spoiled princess.

Now in the women's apartments in the palace there hung two cages, in
one of which was a parrot and in the other a starling, and these two
birds could talk as well as human beings. They were both pets of the
princess who always fed them herself, and the next day, as she was
walking grandly about with her treasure tied round her ankle, she
heard the starling say to the parrot:

'Oh, Tote' (that was the parrot's name), 'how do you think the
princess looks in her new jewel?'

'Think?' snapped the parrot, who was cross because they hadn't given
him his bath that morning, 'I think she looks like a washerwoman's
daughter, with one shoe on and the other off! Why doesn't she wear two
of them, instead of going about with one leg adorned and the other
empty?'

When the princess heard this she burst into tears; and sending for her
father she declared that he must get her another such an anklet to
wear on the other leg, or she would die of shame. So the king sent for
Ameer Ali and told him that he must get a second anklet exactly like
the first within a month, or he should be hanged, for the princess
would certainly die of disappointment.

Poor Ameer Ali was greatly troubled at the king's command, but he
thought to himself that he had, at any rate, a month in which to lay
his plans. He left the palace at once, and inquired of everyone where
the finest jewels were to be got; but though he sought night and day
he never found one to compare with the anklet. At last only a week
remained, and he was in sore difficulty, when he remembered the Fairy
of the forest, and determined to go without loss of time and seek her.
Therefore away he went, and after a day's travelling he reached the
cottage in the forest, and, standing where he had stood when the old
woman called to him, he cried:

'Fairy of the forest! Fairy of the forest! Help me! help me!'

Then there appeared in the doorway the beautiful girl he had seen
before, whom in all his wanderings he had never forgotten.

'What is the matter?' she asked, in a voice so soft that he listened
like one struck dumb, and she had to repeat the question before he
could answer. Then he told her his story, and she went within the
cottage and came back with two wands, and a pot of boiling water. The
two wands she planted in the ground about six feet apart, and then,
turning to him, she said:

'I am going to lie down between these two wands. You must then draw
your sword and cut off my foot, and, as soon as you have done that,
you must seize it and hold it over the cauldron, and every drop of
blood that falls from it into the water will become a jewel. Next you
must change the wands so that the one that stood at my head is at my
feet, and the one at my feet stands at my head, and place the severed
foot against the wound and it will heal, and I shall become quite well
again as before.'

At first Ameer Ali declared that he would sooner be hanged twenty
times over than treat her so roughly; but at length she persuaded him
to do her bidding. He nearly fainted himself with horror when he found
that, after the cruel blow which lopped her foot off, she lay as one
lifeless; but he held the severed foot over the cauldron, and, as
drops of blood fell from it, and he saw each turn in the water into
shining gems, his heart took courage. Very soon there were plenty of
jewels in the cauldron, and he quickly changed the wands, placed the
severed foot against the wound, and immediately the two parts became
one as before. Then the maiden opened her eyes, sprang to her feet,
and drawing her veil about her, ran into the hut, and would not come
out or speak to him any more. For a long while he waited, but, as she
did not appear, he gathered up the precious stones and returned to the
palace. He easily got some one to set the jewels, and found that there
were enough to make, not only one, but three rare and beautiful
anklets, and these he duly presented to the king on the very day that
his month of grace was over.

The king embraced him warmly, and made him rich gifts; and the next
day the vain princess put two anklets on each foot, and strutted up
and down in them admiring herself in the mirrors that lined her room.

'Oh, Tote,' asked the starling, 'how do you think our princess looks
now in these fine jewels?'

  [Illustration]

'Ugh!' growled the parrot, who was really always cross in the
mornings, and never recovered his temper until after lunch, 'she's got
all her beauty at one end of her now; if she had a few of those fine
gew-gaws round her neck and wrists she would look better; but now, to
my mind, she looks more than ever like the washerwoman's daughter
dressed up.'

Poor princess! she wept and stormed and raved until she made herself
quite ill; and then she declared to her father that, unless she had
bracelets and necklace to match the anklets she would die.

Again the king sent for Ameer Ali, and ordered him to get a necklace
and bracelets to match those anklets within a month, or be put to a
cruel death.

And again Ameer Ali spent nearly the whole month searching for the
jewels, but all in vain. At length he made his way to the hut in the
forest, and stood and cried:

'Fairy of the forest! Fairy of the forest! Help me! help me!'

Once more the beautiful maiden appeared at his summons and asked what
he wanted, and when he had told her she said he must do exactly as he
had done the first time, except that now he must cut off both her
hands and her head. Her words turned Ameer Ali pale with horror; but
she reminded him that no harm had come to her before, and at last he
consented to do as she bade him. From her severed hands and head there
fell into the cauldron bracelets and chains of rubies and diamonds,
emeralds and pearls that surpassed any that ever were seen. Then the
head and hands were joined on to the body, and left neither sign nor
scar. Full of gratitude, Ameer Ali tried to speak to her, but she ran
into the house and would not come back, and he was forced to leave her
and go away laden with the jewels.

When, on the day appointed, Ameer Ali produced a necklace and
bracelets each more beautiful and priceless than the last, the king's
astonishment knew no bounds, and as for his daughter she was nearly
mad with joy. The very next morning she put on all her finery, and
thought that now, at least, that disagreeable parrot could find no
fault with her appearance, and she listened eagerly when she heard the
starling say:

'Oh, Tote, how do you think our princess is looking _now_?'

'Very fine, no doubt,' grumbled the parrot; 'but what is the use of
dressing up like that for oneself only? She ought to have a
husband--why doesn't she marry the man who got her all these splendid
things?'

Then the princess sent for her father and told him that she wished to
marry Ameer Ali.

'My dear child,' said her father, 'you really are very difficult to
please, and want something new every day. It certainly is time you
married someone, and if you choose this man, of course he shall marry
you.'

So the king sent for Ameer Ali, and told him that within a month he
proposed to do him the honour of marrying him to the princess, and
making him heir to the throne.

On hearing this speech Ameer Ali bowed low and answered that he had
done and would do the king all the service that lay in his power, save
only this one thing. The king, who considered his daughter's hand a
prize for any man, flew into a passion, and the princess was more
furious still. Ameer Ali was instantly thrown into the most dismal
prison that they could find, and ordered to be kept there until the
king had time to think in what way he should be put to death.

Meanwhile the king determined that the princess ought in any case to
be married without delay, so he sent forth heralds throughout the
neighbouring countries, proclaiming that on a certain day any person
fitted for a bridegroom and heir to the throne should present himself
at the palace.

When the day came, all the court were gathered together, and a great
crowd assembled of men, young and old, who thought that they had as
good a chance as anyone else to gain both the throne and the princess.
As soon as the king was seated, he called upon an usher to summon the
first claimant. But, just then, a farmer who stood in front of the
crowd cried out that he had a petition to offer.

'Well, hasten then,' said the king; 'I have no time to waste.'

'Your majesty,' said the farmer, 'has now lived and administered
justice long in this city, and will know that the tiger who is king
of beasts hunts only in the forest, whilst jackals hunt in every place
where there is something to be picked up.'

'What is all this? what is all this?' asked the king. 'The man must be
mad!'

'No, your majesty,' answered the farmer, 'I would only remind your
majesty that there are plenty of jackals gathered to-day to try and
claim your daughter and kingdom: every city has sent them, and they
wait hungry and eager; but do not, O king, mistake or pretend again to
mistake the howl of a jackal for the hunting cry of a tiger.'

The king turned first red and then pale.

'There is,' continued the farmer, 'a royal tiger bred in the forest
who has the first and only true claim to your throne.'

'Where? what do you mean?' stammered the king, growing pale as he
listened.

'In prison,' replied the farmer; 'if your majesty will clear this
court of the jackals I will explain.'

'Clear the court!' commanded the king; and, very unwillingly, the
visitors left the palace.

'Now tell me what riddle this is,' said he.

Then the farmer told the king and his ministers how he had rescued the
queen and brought up Ameer Ali; and he fetched the old queen herself,
whom he had left outside. At the sight of her the king was filled with
shame and self-reproach, and wished he could have lived his life over
again, and not have married the mother of the proud princess, who
caused him endless trouble until her death.

'My day is past,' said he. And he gave up his crown to his son Ameer
Ali, who went once more and called to the forest fairy to provide him
with a queen to share his throne.

'There is only one person I will marry,' said he. And this time the
maiden did not run away, but agreed to be his wife. So the two were
married without delay, and lived long and reigned happily.

As for the old woman whose pitcher Ameer Ali had broken, she was the
forest maiden's fairy godmother, and when she was no longer needed to
look after the girl she gladly returned to fairyland.

The old king has never been heard to contradict his wife any more. If
he even looks as if he does not agree with her, she smiles at him and
says:

'Is it the tiger, then? or the jackal?' And he has not another word to
say.


FOOTNOTE:

[2] A galail is a double-stringed bow from which bullets or pellets of
hard dried clay can be fired with considerable force and precision.