The Sprig of Rosemary

Cuentos Populars Catalans, per lo Dr. D. Francisco de S. Maspons y
Labros (Barcelona: Libreria de Don Alvar Verdaguer 1885).


Once upon a time there lived a man with one daughter and he made her
work hard all the day. One morning when she had finished everything he
had set her to do, he told her to go out into the woods and get some dry
leaves and sticks to kindle a fire.

The girl went out, and soon collected a large bundle, and then she
plucked at a sprig of sweet-smelling rosemary for herself. But the
harder she pulled the firmer seemed the plant, and at last, determined
not to be beaten, she gave one great tug, and the rosemary remained in
her hands.

Then she heard a voice close to her saying, 'Well?' and turning she saw
before her a handsome young man, who asked why she had come to steal his
firewood.

The girl, who felt much confused, only managed to stammer out as an
excuse that her father had sent her.

'Very well,' replied the young man; 'then come with me.'

So he took her through the opening made by the torn-up root, and they
travelled till they reached a beautiful palace, splendidly furnished,
but only lighted from the top. And when they had entered he told
her that he was a great lord, and that never had he seen a maiden so
beautiful as she, and that if she would give him her heart they would be
married and live happy for ever after.

And the maiden said 'yes, she would,' and so they were married.

The next day the old dame who looked after the house handed her all the
keys, but pointed her out one that she would do well never to use, for
if she did the whole palace would fall to the ground, and the grass
would grow over it, and the damsel herself would be remembered no more.

The bride promised to be careful, but in a little while, when there was
nothing left for her to do, she began to wonder what could be in the
chest, which was opened by the key. As everybody knows, if we once begin
to think we soon begin to do, and it was not very long before the key
was no longer in the maiden's hand but in the lock of the chest. But the
lock was stiff and resisted all her efforts, and in the end she had to
break it. And what was inside after all? Why, nothing but a serpent's
skin, which her husband, who was, unknown to her, a magician, put on
when he was at work; and at the sight of it the girl was turning away
in disgust, when the earth shook violently under her feet, the palace
vanished as if it had never been, and the bride found herself in the
middle of a field, not knowing where she was or whither to go. She burst
into a flood of bitter tears, partly at her own folly, but more for the
loss of her husband, whom she dearly loved. Then, breaking a sprig of
rosemary off a bush hard by, she resolved, cost what it might, to seek
him through the world till she found him. So she walked and she walked
and she walked, till she arrived at a house built of straw. And she
knocked at the door, and asked if they wanted a servant. The mistress
said she did, and if the girl was willing she might stay. But day by day
the poor maiden grew more and more sad, till at last her mistress begged
her to say what was the matter. Then she told her story--how she was
going through the world seeking after her husband.

And her mistress answered her, 'Where he is, none can tell better than
the Sun, the Moon, and the Wind, for they go everywhere!'

On hearing these words the damsel set forth once more, and walked till
she reached the Golden Castle, where lived the Sun. And she knocked
boldly at the door, saying, 'All hail, O Sun! I have come to ask if, of
your charity, you will help me in my need. By my own fault have I fallen
into these straits, and I am weary, for I seek my husband through the
wide world.'

'Indeed!' spoke the Sun. 'Do you, rich as you are, need help? But though
you live in a palace without windows, the Sun enters everywhere, and he
knows you.'

Then the bride told him the whole story. and did not hide her own
ill-doing. And the Sun listened, and was sorry for her; and though he
could not tell her where to go, he gave her a nut, and bid her open it
in a time of great distress. The damsel thanked him with all her heart,
and departed, and walked and walked and walked, till she came to another
castle, and knocked at the door which was opened by an old woman.

'All hail!' said the girl. 'I have come, of your charity, to ask your
help!'

'It is my mistress, the Moon, you seek. I will tell her of your prayer.'

So the Moon came out, and when she saw the maiden she knew her again,
for she had watched her sleeping both in the cottage and in the palace.
And she spake to her and said:

'Do you, rich as you are, need help?'

Then the girl told her the whole story, and the Moon listened, and
was sorry for her; and though she could not tell her where to find her
husband, she gave her an almond, and told her to crack it when she was
in great need. So the damsel thanked her, and departed, and walked and
walked and walked till she came to another castle. And she knocked at
the door, and said:

'All hail! I have come to ask if, of your charity, you will help me in
my need.'

'It is my lord, the Wind, that you want,' answered the old woman who
opened it. 'I will tell him of your prayer.'

And the Wind looked on her and knew her again, for he had seen her in
the cottage and in the palace, and he spake to her and said:

'Do you, rich as you are, want help?'

And she told him the whole story. And the Wind listened, and was sorry
for her, and he gave her a walnut that she was to eat in time of need.
But the girl did not go as the Wind expected. She was tired and sad, and
knew not where to turn, so she began to weep bitterly. The Wind wept too
for company, and said:

'Don't be frightened; I will go and see if I can find out something.'

And the Wind departed with a great noise and fuss, and in the twinkling
of an eye he was back again, beaming with delight.

'From what one person and another have let fall,' he exclaimed, 'I have
contrived to learn that he is in the palace of the king, who keeps him
hidden lest anyone should see him; and that to-morrow he is to marry the
princess, who, ugly creature that she is, has not been able to find any
man to wed her.'

Who can tell the despair which seized the poor maiden when she heard
this news! As soon as she could speak she implored the Wind to do all
he could to get the wedding put off for two or three days, for it would
take her all that time to reach the palace of the king.

The Wind gladly promised to do what he could, and as he travelled much
faster than the maiden he soon arrived at the palace, where he found
five tailors working night and day at the wedding clothes of the
princess.

Down came the Wind right in the middle of their lace and satin and
trimmings of pearl! Away they all went whiz! through the open windows,
right up into the tops of the trees, across the river, among the dancing
ears of corn! After them ran the tailors, catching, jumping, climbing,
but all to no purpose! The lace was torn, the satin stained, the pearls
knocked off! There was nothing for it but to go to the shops to buy
fresh, and to begin all over again! It was plainly quite impossible that
the wedding clothes could be ready next day.

However, the king was much too anxious to see his daughter married to
listen to any excuses, and he declared that a dress must be put together
somehow for the bride to wear. But when he went to look at the princess,
she was such a figure that he agreed that it would be unfitting for her
position to be seen in such a gown, and he ordered the ceremony and the
banquet to be postponed for a few hours, so that the tailors might take
the dress to pieces and make it fit.

But by this time the maiden had arrived footsore and weary at the
castle, and as soon as she reached the door she cracked her nut and
drew out of it the most beautiful mantle in the world. Then she rang the
bell, and asked:

'Is not the princess to be married to-day?'

'Yes, she is.'

'Ask her if she would like to buy this mantle.'

And when the princess saw the mantle she was delighted, for her wedding
mantle had been spoilt with all the other things, and it was too late to
make another. So she told the maiden to ask what price she would, and it
should be given her.

The maiden fixed a large sum, many pieces of gold, but the princess had
set her heart on the mantle, and gave it readily.

Now the maiden hid her gold in the pocket of her dress, and turned away
from the castle. The moment she was out of sight she broke her almond,
and drew from it the most magnificent petticoats that ever were seen.
Then she went back to the castle, and asked if the princess wished to
buy any petticoats. No sooner did the princess cast her eyes on the
petticoats than she declared they were even more beautiful than the
mantle, and that she would give the maiden whatever price she wanted for
them. And the maiden named many pieces of gold, which the princess paid
her gladly, so pleased was she with her new possessions.

Then the girl went down the steps where none could watch her and
cracked her walnut, and out came the most splendid court dress that any
dressmaker had ever invented; and, carrying it carefully in her arms,
she knocked at the door, and asked if the princess wished to buy a court
dress.

When the message was delivered the princess sprang to her feet with
delight, for she had been thinking that after all it was not much use to
have a lovely mantle and elegant petticoats if she had no dress, and she
knew the tailors would never be ready in time. So she sent at once to
say she would buy the dress, and what sum did the maiden want for it.

This time the maiden answered that the price of the dress was the
permission to see the bridegroom.

The princess was not at all pleased when she heard the maiden's reply,
but, as she could not do without the dress, she was forced to give in,
and contented herself with thinking that after all it did not matter
much.

So the maiden was led to the rooms which had been given to her husband.
And when she came near she touched him with the sprig of rosemary that
she carried; and his memory came back, and he knew her, and kissed her,
and declared that she was his true wife, and that he loved her and no
other.

Then they went back to the maiden's home, and grew to be very old, and
lived happy all the days of their life.