The Adventures of the Jackal's Eldest Son

[Nouveaux Contes Berberes, par Rene Basset.]


Now, though the jackal was dead, he had left two sons behind him, every
whit as cunning and tricky as their father. The elder of the two was a
fine handsome creature, who had a pleasant manner and made many friends.
The animal he saw most of was a hyena; and one day, when they were
taking a walk together, they picked up a beautiful green cloak, which
had evidently been dropped by some one riding across the plain on a
camel. Of course each wanted to have it, and they almost quarrelled over
the matter; but at length it was settled that the hyena should wear the
cloak by day and the jackal by night. After a little while, however, the
jackal became discontented with this arrangement, declaring that none of
his friends, who were quite different from those of the hyena, could see
the splendour of the mantle, and that it was only fair that he should
sometimes be allowed to wear it by day. To this the hyena would by no
means consent, and they were on the eve of a quarrel when the hyena
proposed that they should ask the lion to judge between them. The jackal
agreed to this, and the hyena wrapped the cloak about him, and they both
trotted off to the lion's den.

The jackal, who was fond of talking, at once told the story; and when it
was finished the lion turned to the hyena and asked if it was true.

'Quite true, your majesty,' answered the hyena.

'Then lay the cloak on the ground at my feet,' said the lion, 'and I
will give my judgment.' So the mantle was spread upon the red earth, the
hyena and the jackal standing on each side of it.

There was silence for a few moments, and then the lion sat up, looking
very great and wise.

'My judgment is that the garment shall belong wholly to whoever first
rings the bell of the nearest mosque at dawn to-morrow. Now go; for much
business awaits me!'

All that night the hyena sat up, fearing lest the jackal should reach
the bell before him, for the mosque was close at hand. With the first
streak of dawn he bounded away to the bell, just as the jackal, who had
slept soundly all night, was rising to his feet.

'Good luck to you,' cried the jackal. And throwing the cloak over his
back he darted away across the plain, and was seen no more by his friend
the hyena.

After running several miles the jackal thought he was safe from pursuit,
and seeing a lion and another hyena talking together, he strolled up to
join them.

'Good morning,' he said; 'may I ask what is the matter? You seem very
serious about something.'

'Pray sit down,' answered the lion. 'We were wondering in which
direction we should go to find the best dinner. The hyena wishes to go
to the forest, and I to the mountains. What do you say?'

'Well, as I was sauntering over the plain, just now, I noticed a flock
of sheep grazing, and some of them had wandered into a little valley
quite out of sight of the shepherd. If you keep among the rocks you will
never be observed. But perhaps you will allow me to go with you and show
you the way?'

'You are really very kind,' answered the lion. And they crept steadily
along till at length they reached the mouth of the valley where a ram,
a sheep and a lamb were feeding on the rich grass, unconscious of their
danger.

'How shall we divide them?' asked the lion in a whisper to the hyena.

'Oh, it is easily done,' replied the hyena. 'The lamb for me, the sheep
for the jackal, and the ram for the lion.'

'So I am to have that lean creature, which is nothing but horns, am I?'
cried the lion in a rage. 'I will teach you to divide things in that
manner!' And he gave the hyena two great blows, which stretched him
dead in a moment. Then he turned to the jackal and said: 'How would you
divide them?'

'Quite differently from the hyena,' replied the jackal. 'You will
breakfast off the lamb, you will dine off the sheep, and you will sup
off the ram.'

'Dear me, how clever you are! Who taught you such wisdom?' exclaimed the
lion, looking at him admiringly.

'The fate of the hyena,' answered the jackal, laughing, and running off
at his best speed; for he saw two men armed with spears coming close
behind the lion!

 The jackal continued to run till at last he could run no longer.  He
flung himself under a tree panting for breath, when he heard a rustle
amongst the grass, and his father's old friend the hedgehog appeared
before him.

'Oh, is it you?' asked the little creature; 'how strange that we should
meet so far from home!'

'I have just had a narrow escape of my life,' gasped the jackal, 'and
I need some sleep. After that we must think of something to do to amuse
ourselves.' And he lay down again and slept soundly for a couple of
hours.

'Now I am ready,' said he; 'have you anything to propose?'

'In a valley beyond those trees,' answered the hedgehog, 'there is a
small farmhouse where the best butter in the world is made. I know their
ways, and in an hour's time the farmer's wife will be off to milk the
cows, which she keeps at some distance. We could easily get in at the
window of the shed where she keeps the butter, and I will watch, lest
some one should come unexpectedly, while you have a good meal. Then you
shall watch, and I will eat.'

'That sounds a good plan,' replied the jackal; and they set off
together.

But when they reached the farmhouse the jackal said to the hedgehog: 'Go
in and fetch the pots of butter and I will hide them in a safe place.'

'Oh no,' cried the hedgehog, 'I really couldn't. They would find out
directly! And, besides, it is so different just eating a little now and
then.'

'Do as I bid you at once,' said the jackal, looking at the hedgehog so
sternly that the little fellow dared say no more, and soon rolled the
jars to the window where the jackal lifted them out one by one.

When they were all in a row before him he gave a sudden start.

'Run for your life,' he whispered to his companion; 'I see the woman
coming over the hill!' And the hedgehog, his heart beating, set off
as fast as he could. The jackal remained where he was, shaking with
laughter, for the woman was not in sight at all, and he had only sent
the hedgehog away because he did not want him to know where the jars of
butter were buried. But every day he stole out to their hiding-place and
had a delicious feast.

At length, one morning, the hedgehog suddenly said:

'You never told me what you did with those jars?'

'Oh, I hid them safely till the farm people should have forgotten all
about them,' replied the jackal. 'But as they are still searching for
them we must wait a little longer, and then I'll bring them home, and we
will share them between us.'

So the hedgehog waited and waited; but every time he asked if there was
no chance of getting jars of butter the jackal put him off with some
excuse. After a while the hedgehog became suspicious, and said:

'I should like to know where you have hidden them. To-night, when it is
quite dark, you shall show me the place.'

'I really can't tell you,' answered the jackal. 'You talk so much that
you would be sure to confide the secret to somebody, and then we should
have had our trouble for nothing, besides running the risk of our necks
being broken by the farmer. I can see that he is getting disheartened,
and very soon he will give up the search. Have patience just a little
longer.'

The hedgehop said no more, and pretended to be satisfied; but when some
days had gone by he woke the jackal, who was sleeping soundly after a
hunt which had lasted several hours.

'I have just had notice,' remarked the hedgehog, shaking him, 'that my
family wish to have a banquet to-morrow, and they have invited you to
it. Will you come?'

'Certainly,' answered the jackal, 'with pleasure. But as I have to go
out in the morning you can meet me on the road.'

'That will do very well,' replied the hedgehog. And the jackal went to
sleep again, for he was obliged to be up early.

Punctual to the moment the hedgehog arrived at the place appointed for
their meeting, and as the jackal was not there he sat down and waited
for him.

'Ah, there you are!' he cried, when the dusky yellow form at last turned
the corner. 'I had nearly given you up! Indeed, I almost wish you had
not come, for I hardly know where I shall hide you.'

'Why should you hide me anywhere?' asked the jackal. 'What is the matter
with you?'

'Well, so many of the guests have brought their dogs and mules with
them, that I fear it may hardly be safe for you to go amongst them. No;
don't run off that way,' he added quickly, 'because there is another
troop that are coming over the hill. Lie down here, and I will throw
these sacks over you; and keep still for your life, whatever happens.'

And what did happen was, that when the jackal was lying covered up,
under a little hill, the hedgehog set a great stone rolling, which
crushed him to death.